11.3.3. Measurement of sperm DNA Fragmentation Index (DFI). Sperm DNA fragmentation, or the accumulation of single- and double-strand DNA breaks occur in sperm, and an increase in the level of sperm DNA fragmentation has been shown to reduce the chances of natural conception [1564]. Although no studies have unequivocally and directly tested the impact of sperm DNA damage on the clinical management of infertile couples, sperm DNA damage is more common in infertile men and has been identified as a major contributor to male infertility, as well as poorer outcomes following ART [1565,1566], including impaired embryo development [1565], miscarriage, recurrent pregnancy loss [1554,1555,1567], and birth defects [1565]. Sperm DNA damage can be increased by several factors including hormonal anomalies, varicocele, chronic infection and lifestyle factors (e.g., smoking) [1566]. Several assays have been described to measure sperm DNA damage. It has been suggested that current methods for assessing sperm DNA integrity still do not reliably predict treatment outcomes from ART and there is controversy whether to recommend them routinely for clinical use [1566,1568,1569]. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labelling (TUNEL) and the alkaline comet test (COMET) directly measure DNA damage. Conversely, sperm chromatin structure assay (SCSA) and sperm chromatic dispersion test (SCD) are indirect tools for DNA fragmentation assessment. The SCSA is still the most widely studied and one of the most commonly used techniques to detect sperm DNA damage [1570,1571]. In SCSA, the number of cells with DNA damage is indicated by the DNA fragmentation index (DFI) [1572], whereas the proportion of immature sperm with defects in the histone-to-protamine transition is indicated by high DNA stainability [1573]. It is suggested that a threshold DFI of 25% as measured with SCSA, is associated with reduced pregnancy rates via natural conception or intra-uterine insemination (IUI) [1571]. Furthermore, DFI values > 50% on SCSA are associated with poorer outcomes from in vitro fertilisation (IVF). More recently, the mean COMET score and scores for proportions of sperm with high or low DNA damage have been shown to be of value in diagnosing male infertility and providing additional discriminatory information for the prediction of both IVF and ICSI live births [1566]. Testicular sperm in men with raised SDF in ejaculated sperm Testicular sperm is reported to have lower levels of SDF compared to ejaculated sperm [1574]. The use of testicular sperm for ICSI is associated with possibly improved outcomes compared with ejaculated sperm in men with high sperm DNA fragmentation [1574,1575]. Men with unexplained infertility with raised DNA fragmentation may be considered for TESE after failure of ART, although they should be counselled that live-birth rates are under reported in the literature and patients must weigh up the risks of performing an invasive procedure in a potentially normozoospermic or unexplained condition. The advantages of the use of testicular sperm in men with cryptozoospermia have not yet been confirmed in large scale randomised studies [1576]. A recent meta-analysis has suggested that TESE-ICSI may improve the outcomes from ART but there is significant heterogeneity of data and the authors suggest that RCTs are needed to validate the use of TESE in men with raised SDF [1577]. In terms of a practical approach, urologists may offer the use of testicular sperm in patients with high SDF. However, patients should be counselled regarding the low levels of evidence for this (i.e., non-randomised studies). Furthermore, testicular sperm should only be used in this setting once the common causes of oxidative stress have been excluded, including varicoceles, modifications of dietary/lifestyle factors and treatment of accessory gland infections. 