11.3.6. Imaging in infertile men. In addition to physical examination, a scrotal US may be helpful in: (i) measuring testicular volume; (ii) assessing testicular anatomy and structure in terms of US patterns, thus detecting signs of testicular dysgenesis often related to impaired spermatogenesis (e.g., non-homogeneous testicular architecture and microcalcifications) and testicular tumours; and, (iii) finding indirect signs of obstruction (e.g., dilatation of rete testis, enlarged epididymis with cystic lesions, or absent vas deferens) [1549]. In clinical practice, Prader’s orchidometer-derived testicular volume is considered a reliable surrogate of US-measured testicular volume, easier to perform and cost-effective [1548]. Nevertheless, scrotal US has a relevant role in testicular volume assessment when Prader’s orchidometer is unreliable (e.g., large hydrocele, inguinal testis, epididymal enlargement/fibrosis, thickened scrotal skin; small testis, where the epididymis is large in comparison to the total testicular volume [1548,1549]). Ultrasound patterns of testicular inhomogeneity [1637,1638] is usually associated with ageing, although it has also been reported in association with testicular atrophy and fibrosis [1549]. A diagnostic testicular biopsy is not recommended when testicular inhomogeneity is detected [1637,1638]. 11.3.6.1. Scrotal US Scrotal US is widely used in everyday clinical practice in patients with oligo-zoospermia or azoospermia, as infertility has been found to be an additional risk factor for testicular cancer [1639,1640]. It can be used in the diagnosis of several diseases causing infertility including obstructive azoospermia (see section 11.4), testicular neoplasms and varicocele. 11.3.6.1.1. Testicular neoplasms In one study, men with infertility had an increased risk of testicular cancer (hazard ratio [HR] 3.3). When infertility was refined according to individual semen parameters, oligozoospermic men had an increased risk of cancer compared with fertile control subjects (HR 11.9) [1641]. In a recent systematic review infertile men with testicular microcalcification (TM) were found to have a ~18-fold higher prevalence of testicular cancer [1642]. The utility of US as a routine screening tool in men with infertility to detect testicular cancer remains a matter of debate [1639,1640]. Indeed, these testicular lesions are difficult to characterise as being benign or malignant based only upon US criteria, including size, vascularity and echogenicity. A dichotomous cut-off of certainty in terms of lesion size that may definitely distinguish benign from malignant testicular masses is currently not available. A systematic review and meta-analysis was carried out by the Testicular Cancer and the Sexual and reproductive health EAU Guidelines panels to to define which scrotal US or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) characteristics can predict benign or malignant disease in pre- or post-pubertal males with indeterminate testicular masses [1643]. Benign and malignant masses were classified using the reported reference test: i.e., histopathology, or 12 months progression-free radiological surveillance. A total of 32 studies were identified, including 1692 masses of which 28 studies and 1550 masses reported scrotal US features, four studies and 142 masses reported MRI features. Meta-analysis of different scrotal US (B-mode) values in post-pubertal men demonstrated that a size of ≤0.5 cm had a significantly lower OR of malignancy compared to masses of >0.5 cm (p < 0.001). Comparison of masses of 0.6-1.0 cm and masses of > 1.5 cm also demonstrated a significantly lower OR of malignancy (p = 0.04). There was no significant difference between masses of 0.6-1.0 and 1.1-1.5 cm. Scrotal US in post-pubertal men also had a significantly lower OR of malignancy for heterogenous masses compared to homogenous masses (p = 0.04), hyperechogenic vs. hypoechogenic masses (p < 0.01), normal vs. increased enhancement (p < 0.01), and peripheral vs. central vascularity (P < 0.01), respectively. There were limited data on pre-pubertal SUS, pre-pubertal MRI and post-pubertal MRI [1643]. Small hypoechoic/hyperechoic areas may be diagnosed as intra-testicular cysts, focal Leydig cell hyperplasia, fibrosis and focal testicular inhomogeneity after previous pathological conditions. Hence, they require careful periodic US assessment and follow-up, especially if additional risk factors for malignancy are present (i.e., infertility, bilateral TM, history of cryptorchidism, testicular atrophy, inhomogeneous parenchyma, history of testicular tumour, history of/contralateral tumour) [1549]. In the case of interval growth of a lesion and/or the presence of additional risk factors for malignancy, testicular biopsy/surgery may be considered, although the evidence for adopting such a management policy is limited. In 145 men referred for azoospermia who underwent US before testicular biopsy, 49 (34%) had a focal US abnormality; a hypoechoic lesion was found in 20 patients (14%), hyperechoic lesions were seen in 10 patients (7%); and, a heterogeneous appearance of the testicular parenchyma was seen in 19 patients (13%). Of 18 evaluable patients, 11 had lesions < 5 mm; all of which were confirmed to be benign. All other patients with hyperechoic or heterogeneous areas on US with subsequent tissue diagnoses were found to have benign lesions. The authors concluded that men with severe infertility who have incidental testicular lesions, negative tumour markers and lesions < 5 mm may be observed with serial scrotal US examinations and enlarging lesions or those of greater dimension can be considered for histological biopsy [1644]. Other studies have suggested that if a testicular lesion is hyperechoic and non-vascular on colour Doppler US and associated with negative tumour markers, the likelihood of malignancy is low and consideration can be given to regular testicular surveillance, as an alternative to radical surgery. In contrast, hypoechoic and vascular lesions are more likely to be malignant [1645-1649]. However, most lesions cannot be characterised by US (indeterminate), and histology remains the only certain diagnostic tool. A multidisciplinary team discussion (MDT), including invasive diagnostic modalities, should therefore be considered in these patients. The role of US-guided intra-operative frozen section analysis in the diagnosis of testicular cancer in indeterminate lesions can be considered, and several authors have proposed its value in the intra-operative diagnosis of indeterminate testicular lesions [1650]. Although the default treatment after patient counselling and MDT discussion may be radical orchidectomy, an US-guided biopsy with intra-operative frozen section analysis may be offered as an alternative to radical orchidectomy and potentially obviate the need for removal of the testis in a patient seeking fertility treatment. In men with azoospermia a concurrent TESE with sperm banking can also be performed at the time of surgical intervention. 11.3.6.1.2. Varicocele At present, the clinical management of varicocele is still mainly based on physical examination; nevertheless, scrotal colour Doppler US is useful in assessing venous reflux and diameter, when palpation is unreliable and/or in detecting recurrence/persistence after surgery [1549]. Definitive evidence of reflux and venous diameter may be utilised in the decision to treat (see Section 11.4.3.1 and 11.4.3.2). 11.3.6.1.3. Other Scrotal US is able to detect changes in the proximal part of the seminal tract due to obstruction. Especially for CBAVD patients, scrotal US is a favourable option to detect the abnormal appearance of the epididymis. Given that, three types of epididymal findings are described in CBAVD patients: tubular ectasia (honeycomb appearance), meshwork pattern, and complete or partial absence of the epididymis [1651,1652]. 11.3.6.2. Transrectal US For patients with a low seminal volume, acidic pH and severe oligozoospermia or azoospermia, in whom obstruction is suspected, scrotal and transrectal US are of clinical value in detecting CBAVD and presence or absence of the epididymis and/or seminal vesicles (SV) (e.g., abnormalities/agenesis). Likewise, transrectal US (TRUS) has an important role in assessing obstructive azoospermia (OA) secondary to CBAVD or anomalies related to the obstruction of the ejaculatory ducts, such as ejaculatory duct cysts, seminal vesicle dilatation or hypoplasia/atrophy, although retrograde ejaculation should be excluded as a differential diagnosis [1549,1653]. 