11.3.1. Medical/reproductive history and physical examination. 11.3.1.1. Medical and reproductive history Medical history should evaluate any risk factors and behavioural patterns that could affect male partner’s fertility, such as lifestyle, family history (including, testicular cancer), comorbidities (including systemic diseases; e.g., hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obesity, MetS, testicular cancer, etc.), genito-urinary infections (including sexually transmitted infections), history of testicular surgery and exclude any potential known gonadotoxic medication or recreational drugs [1547]. Typical findings from the history of a patient with infertility include: cryptorchidism (uni- or bilateral);testicular torsion and trauma;genitourinary infections;exposure to environmental toxins;gonadotoxic medications (e.g., anabolic drugs, chemotherapeutic agents, etc.);exposure to radiation or cytotoxic agents. 11.3.1.2. Physical examination A focused physical examination is compulsory in the evaluation of every infertile male, including presence of secondary sexual characteristics. The size, texture and consistency of the testes must be evaluated. In clinical practice, testicular volume is assessed by Prader’s orchidometer [1548]; orchidometry may over-estimate testicular volume compared to US assessment [1549]. There are no uniform reference values in terms of Prader’s orchidometer-derived testicular volume, due to differences in the populations studied (e.g., geographic area, nourishment, ethnicity and environmental factors) [1548-1550]. The mean Prader’s orchidometer-derived testis volume reported in the European general population is 20.0 ± 5.0 mL [1548], whereas in infertile patients it is 18.0 ± 5.0 mL [1548,1551-1553]. The presence of the vas deferens, fullness of epididymis and presence of a varicocele should be always determined. Likewise, palpable abnormalities of the testis, epididymis, and vas deferens should be evaluated. Other physical alterations, such as abnormalities of the penis (e.g., phimosis, short frenulum, fibrotic nodules, epispadias, hypospadias, etc.), abnormal body hair distribution and gynecomastia, should also be evaluated. Typical findings from the physical examination of a patient with characteristics suggestive for testicular deficiency include: abnormal secondary sexual characteristics;abnormal testicular volume and/or consistency;testicular masses (potentially suggestive of cancer);absence of testes (uni-bilaterally);gynaecomastia;varicocele. 