11.3.2. Semen analysis. The 6th edition the WHO Manual for the Examination and Processing of Human Semen [1545] has been published on July 2021 and comprises of three sections: i) semen examination; ii) sperm preparation and cryopreservation; and, iii) quality assessment and quality control. Procedures for semen examination are divided: Basic examinations, that should be performed by every laboratory, based on standardised procedures and evidence-based techniques.Extended analyses, which are performed by choice of the laboratory or by special request from the clinicians.Advanced examinations. Basic examination summary : Assessment of sperm numbers: the laboratory should not stop assessing the number of sperm at low concentrations (2 million/mL), as suggested in the 5th edition, but report lower concentrations, noting that the errors associated with counting a small number of spermatozoa may be high. It is recognised that the total sperm numbers per ejaculate (sperm output) have more diagnostic value than sperm concentration; therefore, semen volume must be measured accurately.Assessment of sperm motility: the categorisation of sperm motility has reverted back to fast progressively motile, slow progressively motile, non-progressively motile and immotile (grade a, b, c or d) because presence (or absence) of rapid progressive spermatozoa is recognised to be clinically important.Assessment of sperm morphology: the 6th edition has recommended the Tygerberg strict criteria by sperm adapted Papanicolaou staining.Assessment of vitality should not be performed in all samples, only if more than 60% of spermatozoa are immotile. Extended examinations This chapter contains procedures to detect leukocytes and markers of genital tract inflammation, sperm antibodies, indices of multiple sperm defects, sequence of ejaculation, methods to detect sperm aneuploidy, semen biochemistry and sperm DNA fragmentation. Reference ranges and reference limits The lower fifth percentile of the distribution of semen analysis values from approximately 3500 men in 12 countries who have contributed to a natural conception within 12 months of trying does not represent a limit between fertile and infertile men. For a general prediction of live birth in vivo as well as in vitro, a multiparametric interpretation of the entire men’s and partner’s reproductive potential are needed. Reference values for semen parameters are represented in Table 40 [1541]. Moreover, more complex testing (e.g., sperm DNA fragmentation) than classic semen analysis may be required in everyday clinical practice, particularly in men belonging to couples with recurrent pregnancy loss from natural conception or ART and in men with unexplained male infertility. Although definitive conclusions cannot be drawn, given the heterogeneity of the studies, increased sperm DNA damage is associated with pregnancy failure [1523,1554,1555]. Table 40: Lower reference limits (5th centiles and their 95% CIs) for semen characteristics Parameter2021 Lower reference limit(95% CI)Semen volume (mL)1.4 (1.3-1.5)Total sperm number (106/ejaculate)39 (35-40)Sperm concentration (106/mL)16 (15-18)Total motility (PR + NP, %)42 (40-43)Progressive motility (PR, %)30 (29-31)Vitality (live spermatozoa, %)54 (50-56)Sperm morphology (normal forms, %)4 (3.9-4.0)Other consensus threshold valuespH> 7.2Peroxidase-positive leukocytes (106/mL)< 1.0Tests for antibodies on spermatozoaMAR test (motile spermatozoa with bound particles, %)No evidence-based reference values. Each laboratory should define its normal reference ranges by testing a sufficiently large number of fertile men.Immunobead test (motile spermatozoa with bound beads, %)No evidence-based reference limits.Accessory gland functionSeminal zinc (μmol/ejaculate)> 2.4Seminal fructose (μmol/ejaculate)> 13Seminal neutral α-glucosidase (mU/ejaculate)> 20 CIs = confidence intervals; MAR = mixed antiglobulin reaction; NP = non-progressive; PR = progressive(a+b motility).* Distribution of data from the population is presented with one-sided intervals (extremes of the reference population data). The lower 5th percentile represents the level under which only results from 5% of the men in the reference population were found. If semen analysis is normal according to WHO criteria, a single test is sufficient. If the results are abnormal on at least two tests, further andrological investigation is indicated. None of the individual sperm parameters (e.g., concentration, morphology and motility), are diagnostic per se of infertility. According to WHO reference criteria 5th edn., it is important to differentiate between the following [1556]: oligozoospermia: < 16 million sperm/mL;asthenozoospermia: < 32% progressive motile sperm;teratozoospermia: < 4% normal forms. According to the WHO reference criteria 6th edn., this subdivision is not reported, although the EAU Guidelines panel considers this further segregation still clinically relevant in the everyday clinical practice. Often, all three anomalies occur simultaneously, which is defined as oligo-astheno-terato-zoospermia (OAT) syndrome. As in azoospermia (namely, the complete absence of spermatozoa in semen), in severe cases of oligozoospermia (spermatozoa < 5 million/mL) [1557], there is an increased incidence of obstruction of the male genital tract and genetic abnormalities. In case of azoospermia, full andrological investigation should be warranted to classify obstructive azoospermia (OA) versus non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA). A recommended method to diagnose absolute azoospermia versus cryptozoospermia is semen centrifugation at 3,000 g for 15 minutes and a thorough microscopic examination by phase contrast optics at ×200 magnification of the pellet. All samples can be stained and re-examined microscopically [1558]. This is to ensure that small quantities of sperm are detected, which may be potentially used for intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI); therefore removing the need for surgical intervention. Advanced examinations Obsolete tests such as the human oocyte and human zona pellucida binding and the hamster oocyte penetration tests have been completely removed. Research tests include assessment of ROS and oxidative stress, membrane ion channels, acrosome reaction and sperm chromatin structure and stability, computer-assisted sperm analysis (CASA). Measurement of Oxidative Stress Oxidative stress is considered to be central in male infertility by affecting sperm quality, function, as well as the integrity of sperm [1559]. Oxidative stress may lead to sperm DNA damage and poorer DNA integrity, which are associated with poor embryo development, miscarriage and infertility [1560,1561]. Spermatozoa are vulnerable to oxidative stress and have limited capacity to repair damaged DNA. Oxidative stress is generally associated with poor lifestyle (e.g., smoking) and environmental exposure, and therefore antioxidant regimens and lifestyle interventions may reduce the risk of DNA fragmentation and improve sperm quality [1562]. However, these data have not been supported by RCTs. Although ROS can be measured by various assays (e.g., chemiluminescence), no standardised testing methods for ROS are available and routine measurement of ROS testing should remain experimental until these tests are validated in RCTs [1563]. 