4.1.4.2.1.1. Comparison of different anticholinergic agents. Head-to-head comparison trials of the efficacy and adverse effects of different anticholinergic agents are of interest for decision-making. Both a network meta-analysis and a SR revealed no superior anticholinergic preparation for cure or improvement [161,165]. There were no clinically significant differences between anticholinergics for voiding and UI outcomes. No single anticholinergic agent improved QoL more than another [165]. Conflicting results were reported from another network meta-analysis of 53 RCTs that compared the efficacy and tolerability of solifenacin 5 mg/day with other oral anticholinergics in the treatment of adults with OAB symptoms [166]. Solifenacin 5 mg/day was significantly more effective than tolterodine 4 mg/day for reducing UUI episodes, but significantly less effective than solifenacin 10 mg/day for reducing micturition episodes. Solifenacin 5 mg/day showed significantly lower risk of dry mouth compared with other anticholinergics but no significant differences for the risk of blurred vision or constipation. A further network meta-analysis with 128 RCTs including both genders showed that all anticholinergics were worse than placebo in terms of dry mouth with transdermal oxybutynin having the smallest difference [161]. Dry mouth is the most prevalent reported adverse effect. Extended-release formulations are associated with lower rates of dry mouth than IR preparations [165,167]. Oxybutynin IR shows higher rates of dry mouth than tolterodine IR and trospium IR but lower rates of dry mouth than darifenacin, 15 mg daily [165,167]. Overall, oxybutynin ER causes higher rates of dry mouth than tolterodine ER does, although the incidence of moderate or severe dry mouth is similar. Transdermal oxybutynin has a lower rate of dry mouth than oxybutynin IR and tolterodine ER but an overall higher rate of withdrawal due to adverse skin reactions [165]. Solifenacin 10 mg daily has higher rates of dry mouth than tolterodine ER [165]. Fesoterodine 8 mg daily has a higher rate of dry mouth than tolterodine 4 mg daily [168-170]. Similar discontinuation rates have been observed, irrespective of differences in the occurrence of dry mouth. It is notable that nearly all the primary studies in this category were industry sponsored. In general, these studies have been designed to achieve regulatory approval. Upward dose titration is often included in the protocol for the experimental arm but not for the comparator arm. They have short treatment durations (twelve weeks) and a primary outcome of a change in OAB symptoms rather than a cure of, or an improvement in, UUI, which were generally analysed as secondary outcomes. The clinical utility of these trials in real-life practice is therefore debatable. Most trials were of low or moderate quality [165]. 