4.1.4.2.2.1. Beta-3 agonists versus anticholinergics. One SR [190] assessed the outcomes of mirabegron in women with OAB. It included seven RCTs, three non-randomised comparative studies and eleven observational studies. The review reported no statistical difference between mirabegron and anticholinergics in decreasing OAB symptoms on voiding diaries and symptom questionnaires on short-term follow-up (up to twelve weeks). However, at one year follow-up, there was a statistically significant decrease in OAB symptoms in favour of mirabegron. Another SR identified four studies on 371 women that compared beta-3 agonists with antimuscarinics. Pooled analysis for the studies showed that beta-3 agonists were significantly more effective than antimuscarinics in reducing nocturia episodes. No significant differences were found between antimuscarinics and beta-3 agonists in reduction of mean symptoms score, urgency episodes, frequency episodes, UUI episodes, or voided volumes [11]. Antimuscarinics caused higher rates of dry mouth than beta-3 agonists, but no significant difference was found in constipation rates [11]. Post hoc analyses of RCTs showed that clinical improvement in OAB severity translates into improvement in HRQoL and efficacy is maintained in patients with more severe UI [191,192]. No risk of QTc prolongation [193] and no raised intraocular pressure [194] were observed up to the 100 mg dose; however, patients with uncontrolled hypertension or cardiac arrhythmia were excluded from these trials. There is no significant difference in the rate of adverse effects at different doses of mirabegron [187]. Equivalent adherence was observed for tolterodine and mirabegron at twelve months (5.5% and 3.6%), although the incidence of dry mouth was significantly higher in the tolterodine group [187]. In mirabegron-treated patients, improvement in objective outcome measures correlates directly with clinically relevant PROMs (Overactive Bladder questionnaire and Patient Perception of Bladder Condition) [191,195]. Data from a large Canadian Private Drug Plan database suggest a higher adherence rate for mirabegron compared to anticholinergics [196]. An RCT in patients who had inadequate response to solifenacin monotherapy 5 mg demonstrated that combination treatment with mirabegron 50 mg had a higher chance of achieving clinically meaningful improvement in UI as compared to dose escalation of solifenacin [197]. 