7.4.4. Combination therapy. 7.4.4.1. Intravesical BCG plus chemotherapy versus BCG alone In one RCT, a combination of MMC and BCG was shown to be more effective in reducing the risk of disease recurrence while increasing toxicity compared to BCG monotherapy. Using similar BCG schedules in both groups, each BCG instillation in the combination group was preceded a day before by an added MMC instillation [352]. In a RCT using MMC with EMDA, a combination of BCG and MMC with EMDA showed an improved recurrence-free interval and reduced progression rate compared to BCG monotherapy [306,353]. Two meta-analyses demonstrated improved disease-free survival (DFS), but no benefit in PFS in patients treated with combination treatment comparing to BCG monotherapy [353,354]. 7.4.4.2. Combination treatment using interferon In a Cochrane meta-analysis of 4 RCTs, a combination of BCG and IFN-2α did not show a clear difference in recurrence and progression over BCG alone [355]. In one study, weekly MMC followed by monthly BCG alternating with IFN-2α showed a higher probability of recurrence compared to MMC followed by BCG alone [356]. Additionally, a RCT in a similar population of NMIBC comparing BCG monotherapy with a combination of epirubicin and INF for up to two years showed the latter was significantly inferior to BCG monotherapy in preventing recurrence [357]. 7.4.4.3. Sequential chemotherapy instillations Preclinical data suggest that the efficacy of intravesical chemotherapy instillations can be improved by combinations compared to the administration of single agents only [358]. Sequential (immediate) instillations of gemcitabine and docetaxel was initially reported in 2015 in the wake of BCG-shortage but also at times of limited access to mitomycin [359]. Subsequently other sequential chemotherapy combinations such as valrubicin and docetaxel have been suggested [360]. Over time, additional retrospective data have accumulated where sequential gemcitabine and docetaxel instillations were used in patients recurring after induction BCG and BCG-unresponsive disease [361]; in patients with recurrence after BCG-induction but not fulfilling the criteria for BCG-unresponsive disease [362]; and also in BCG-naïve high-risk patients [363]. Thus, in patients with BCG-unresponsive disease when the treatment standard (radical cystectomy) is not feasible due to age and/or comorbidity or when patients are unwilling to accept radical surgery, sequential instillations with gemcitabine and docetaxel is an emerging treatment concept awaiting further prospective scientific evaluation. 