7.4.3. Intravesical bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) immunotherapy. 7.4.3.1. Efficacy of BCG 7.4.3.1.1. Recurrence rate Five meta-analyses have confirmed that BCG after TURB is superior to TURB alone or TURB plus chemotherapy for preventing the recurrence of NMIBC [285,307-310]. Three RCTs of intermediate- and high-risk tumours have compared BCG with epirubicin and interferon (INF) [311], MMC [312], or epirubicin alone [286] and have confirmed the superiority of BCG for prevention of tumour recurrence (LE: 1a). The effect is long lasting [286,312] and was also observed in a separate analysis of patients with intermediate-risk tumours [286]. One meta-analysis [285] has evaluated the individual data from 2,820 patients enrolled in 9 RCTs that have compared MMC vs. BCG. In the trials with BCG maintenance, there was a 32% reduction in the risk of recurrence for BCG compared to MMC, but a 28% increase in the risk of recurrence for patients treated with BCG in the trials without BCG maintenance. A Cochrane systematic review confirmed that BCG is more effective in reducing the recurrence rate over MMC [313]. 7.4.3.1.2. Progression rate Two meta-analyses have demonstrated that BCG therapy delays and potentially lowers the risk of tumour progression [283,284,310] (LE: 1a). A meta-analysis carried out by the EORTC GUCG has evaluated data from 4,863 patients enrolled in 24 RCTs. In 20 of the trials, some form of BCG maintenance was used. Based on a median follow-up of 2.5 years, tumours progressed in 9.8% of the patients treated with BCG compared to 13.8% in the control groups (TURB alone, TURB and intravesical chemotherapy, or TURB with the addition of other immunotherapy). This shows a reduction of 27% in the odds of progression with BCG maintenance treatment. The size of the reduction was similar in patients with TaT1 papillary tumours and in those with CIS [284]. A RCT with long-term follow-up has demonstrated significantly fewer distant metastases and better overall- and disease-specific survival in patients treated with BCG compared to epirubicin [286] (LE: 1b). In contrast, an individual patient data meta-analysis and Cochrane review were not able to confirm any statistically significant difference between MMC and BCG for progression, survival, and cause of death [285,313]. The conflicting results in the outcomes of these studies can be explained by different patient characteristics, duration of follow-up, methodology and statistical power. However, most studies showed a reduction in the risk of progression in high-and intermediate-risk tumours if a BCG maintenance schedule was applied. 7.4.3.1.3. Influence of further factors Two other meta-analyses have suggested a possible bias in favour of BCG arising from the inclusion of patients previously treated with intravesical chemotherapy [314]. In the individual patient data meta-analysis, however, BCG maintenance was more effective than MMC in reduction of recurrence rate, both in patients previously treated and not previously treated with chemotherapy [285] (LE: 1a). It was demonstrated that BCG was less effective in patients > 70 years of age, but still more effective than epirubicin in a cohort of elderly patients [315] (LE: 1a). According to a cohort analysis, the risk of tumour recurrence after BCG was shown to be higher in patients with a previous history of UTUC [316]. 7.4.3.2. BCG strain Although smaller studies without maintenance demonstrated some differences between strains [316-318], a network meta-analysis identified ten different BCG strains used for intravesical treatment in the published literature but was not able to confirm superiority of any BCG strain over another [319]. Similarly, a meta-analysis of prospective RCTs [284], published data from a prospective registry [320] as well as from a post-hoc analysis of a large phase II prospective trial assessing BCG and INF-α in both BCG-naive and BCG-failure patients did not suggest any clear difference in efficacy between the different BCG strains [321]. The quality of data, however, does not allow definitive conclusions. 7.4.3.3. BCG toxicity Bacillus Calmette-Guérin intravesical treatment is associated with more side effects compared to intravesical chemotherapy [284,313]. However, serious side effects are encountered in < 5% of patients and can be treated effectively in almost all cases [322]. The incidence of BCG infections after BCG instillations was 1% in a registry-based cohort analysis [323]. It has been shown that a maintenance schedule is not associated with an increased risk of side effects compared to an induction course [322]. Side effects requiring treatment stoppage were seen more often in the first year of therapy [324]. Elderly patients do not seem to experience more side effects leading to treatment discontinuation [325]. No significant difference in toxicity between different BCG strains was demonstrated [320]. Symptoms may be the result of side effects of the BCG treatment or caused by bladder disease (widespread CIS) itself. Consequently, the burden of symptoms is reduced after completion of the treatment in a significant number of patients albeit delayed hypersensitivity to BCG may rarely present even years after completion of treatment [326]. Major complications can appear after systemic absorption of the drug. Thus, contraindications of BCG intravesical instillation should be respected (see Section 7.9). The presence of leukocyturia, nonvisible haematuria or asymptomatic bacteriuria is not a contraindication for BCG application, and antibiotic prophylaxis is not necessary in these cases [131,327] (LE: 3). Three RCTs showed reduced side effects by administering different quinolones in conjunction with the BCG-instillations [328-330]. The latter, by using two doses of levofloxacin (at 6 and 12 hours after first voiding) in conjunction with each BCG-instillation, reduced the proportion of patients with high-grade side effects, both local (pollakisuria) and systemic (fever), without improving the completion rate of the maintenance regimen or the risk of severe BCG related adverse events [330]. Bacillus Calmette-Guérin should be used with caution in immunocompromised patients. Immunosuppression, for example human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, poses relative contraindications [331], although some small studies have shown similar efficacy and no increase in complications compared to non-immunocompromised patients. The role of prophylactic anti-tuberculosis medication in these patients remains unclear [332-334]. Kidney transplant recipients can be safely treated with BCG [335]. The management of side effects after BCG should reflect their type and grade according to the recommendations provided by the International Bladder Cancer Group (IBCG) and by a Spanish group [336,337] (Table 7.1). Table 7.1: Management options for side effects associated with intravesical BCG [337-340] Management options for local side effects (modified from International Bladder Cancer Group)Symptoms of cystitisPhenazopyridine, propantheline bromide, or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).If symptoms improve within a few days: continue instillations.If symptoms persist or worsen:a.Postpone the instillation.b.Perform a urine culture.c.Start empirical antibiotic treatment.If symptoms persist even with antibiotic treatment:a.With positive culture: adjust antibiotic treatment according to sensitivity.b.With negative culture: quinolones* and potentially analgesic anti-inflammatory instillations once daily for 5 days (repeat cycle if necessary) [338].If symptoms persist: anti-tuberculosis drugs + corticosteroids.If no response to treatment and/or contracted bladder: radical cystectomy.HaematuriaPerform urine culture to exclude haemorrhagic cystitis if other symptoms present.If haematuria persists, perform cystoscopy to evaluate presence of bladder tumour.Symptomatic granulomatousprostatitisSymptoms rarely present: perform urine culture.Quinolones.If quinolones are not effective: isoniazid (300 mg/day) and rifampicin (600 mg/day) for 3 months.Cessation of intravesical therapy.Epididymo-orchitis [339]Perform urine culture and administer quinolones.Cessation of intravesical therapy.Orchidectomy if abscess or no response to treatment.Management options for systemic side effectsGeneral malaise, feverGenerally resolve within 48 hours, with or without antipyretics.Arthralgia and/or arthritisRare complication and considered autoimmune reaction.Arthralgia: treatment with NSAIDs.Reactive arthritis: NSAIDs.If no/partial response, proceed to corticosteroids, high-dose quinolones or antituberculosis drugs [340].Persistent high-grade fever(> 38.5°C for > 48 h)Permanent discontinuation of BCG instillations.Immediate evaluation: urine culture, blood tests, chest X-ray.Prompt treatment with more than two antimicrobial agents while diagnostic evaluation is conducted.Consultation with an infectious diseases specialist.BCG sepsisPrevention: initiate BCG at least 2 weeks post-transurethral resection of the bladder (if no signs and symptoms of haematuria).Cessation of BCG.For severe infection:High-dose quinolones or isoniazid, rifampicin, and ethambutol 1.2 g daily for6 months.Early, high-dose corticosteroids as long as symptoms persist.Consider an empirical non-specific antibiotic to cover Gram-negative bacteria and/or Enterococcus.Allergic reactionsAntihistamines and anti-inflammatory agents.Consider high-dose quinolones or isoniazid and rifampicin for persistent symptoms.Delay therapy until reactions resolve. * Persistent severe cystitis symptoms associated with BCG use have a high risk to underlie a complicated UTI (even in the absence of a positive culture) and thus no restriction applies to the empirical use of quinolones by the Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee of the EMA (see also Section 3.7 Complicated UTI and 3.7.4.1- Choice of antimicrobials of the EAU Guidelines on Urological Infection 2022). [341, 342] 7.4.3.4. Optimal BCG schedule Induction BCG instillations are given according to the empirical 6-weekly schedule introduced by Morales et al., [343]. For optimal efficacy, BCG must be given in a maintenance schedule [283-285,310]. Many different maintenance schedules have been used, ranging from a total of 10 instillations given in 18 to 27 weeks over 3 years [344]. The optimal 3-years maintenance schedule is outlined in recommendation table 7.10. 7.4.3.4.1. Optimal number of induction instillations and frequency of instillations during maintenance The optimal number of induction instillations and frequency of maintenance instillations were evaluated by NIMBUS, a prospective phase III RCT. Safety analysis after 345 randomised patients demonstrated that a reduced number of instillations (3 instillations in induction and 2 instillations at 3, 6 and 12 months) proved inferior to the standard schedule (6 instillation in induction and 3 instillations at 3, 6 and 12 months) regarding the time to first recurrence [345]. In a RCT including 397 patients CUETO showed that in high-risk tumours a maintenance schedule with only one instillation every 3 months for 3 years was not superior to induction therapy only, which suggested that one instillation may be suboptimal to 3 instillations in each maintenance cycle [346]. 7.4.3.4.2. Optimal length of maintenance In their meta-analysis, Böhle et al., concluded that at least one year of maintenance BCG is required to obtain superiority of BCG over MMC for prevention of recurrence or progression [283]. In a RCT of 1,355 patients, the EORTC has shown that when BCG is given at full dose, 3 years’ maintenance (3-weekly instillations 3, 6, 12, 18, 24, 30 and 36 months) reduces the recurrence rate compared to one year in high- but not in intermediate-risk patients. There were no differences in progression or OS. In the 3-year arm, however, 36.1% of patients did not complete the 3-year schedule [347]. The main reason why these patients stopped treatment was treatment inefficacy, not toxicity. 7.4.3.5. Optimal dose of BCG To reduce BCG toxicity, instillation of a reduced dose was proposed. However, it has been suggested that a full dose of BCG is more effective in multifocal tumours [348,349]. The CUETO study compared one-third dose to full-dose BCG and found no overall difference in efficacy. One-third of the standard dose of BCG might be the minimum effective dose for intermediate-risk tumours. A further reduction to one-sixth dose resulted in a decrease in efficacy with no decrease in toxicity [350]. The EORTC did not find any difference in toxicity between one-third and full-dose BCG, but one-third dose BCG was associated with a higher recurrence rate, especially when it was given only for one year [324,347]. In a recent meta-analysis of 9 RCTs, patients who received less than half of the standard BCG dose experienced less adverse events as compared to patients receiving the full dose, but faced more unfavourable outcomes such as higher rates of disease recurrences [351]. 7.4.3.6. BCG shortage A statement by the Panel on BCG shortage can be accessed online:https://uroweb.org/guidelines/non-muscle-invasive-bladder-cancer/publications-appendices. 7.4.3.7. Summary of evidence - BCG treatment Summary of evidenceLEIn patients with intermediate- and high-risk tumours, intravesical BCG after TURB reduces the risk of tumour recurrence; it is more effective than TURB alone or TURB and intravesical chemotherapy.1aFor optimal efficacy, BCG must be given in a maintenance schedule. A complete BCG schedule comprises an induction phase of 6-weekly instillations, followed by a maintenance phase of three-weekly instillations at 3, 6, 12, 18, 24, 30 and 36 months, respectively.1aThree-year maintenance is more effective than one year to prevent recurrence in patients with high-risk tumours, but not in patients with intermediate-risk tumours.1a 