7.4.5. Specific aspects of treatment of carcinoma in situ. 7.4.5.1. Treatment strategy The detection of concurrent CIS increases the risk of recurrence and progression of TaT1 tumours [221,223]. In this case further treatment according to the criteria summarised in Sections 7.4.2, 7.4.3 and 7.9 is mandatory. Carcinoma in situ cannot be cured by an endoscopic procedure alone. Histological diagnosis of CIS must be followed by further treatment, either intravesical BCG instillations or RC. Tumour-specific survival rates after immediate RC for CIS are excellent, but a large proportion of patients might be over-treated [232]. 7.4.5.2. Cohort studies on intravesical BCG or chemotherapy In retrospective evaluations of patients with CIS, a complete response rate of 48% was achieved with intravesical chemotherapy and 72−93% with BCG [232-235,356]. Up to 50% of complete responders might eventually show recurrence with a risk of invasion and/or extravesical recurrence [235,276,344,364]. 7.4.5.3. Prospective randomised trials on intravesical BCG or chemotherapy Unfortunately, there have been few RCTs in patients with CIS only. A meta-analysis of clinical trials comparing intravesical BCG to intravesical chemotherapy in patients with CIS has shown a significantly increased response rate after BCG and a reduction of 59% in the odds of treatment failure with BCG [365]. In an EORTC-GUCG meta-analysis of tumour progression, in a subgroup of 403 patients with CIS, BCG reduced the risk of progression by 35% as compared to intravesical chemotherapy or immunotherapy [284]. The combination of BCG and MMC was not superior to BCG alone [366]. In summary, compared to chemotherapy, BCG treatment of CIS increases the complete response rate, the overall percentage of patients who remain disease free, and reduces the risk of tumour progression. 7.4.5.4. Treatment of CIS in the prostatic urethra and upper urinary tract Patients with CIS are at high risk of extravesical involvement in the UUT and in the prostatic urethra. Solsona et al., found that 63% of 138 patients with CIS developed extravesical involvement initially or during follow-up [367]. Patients with extravesical involvement had worse survival than those with bladder CIS alone [367]. In the prostate, CIS might be present only in the epithelial lining of the prostatic urethra or in the prostatic ducts [368]. These situations should be distinguished from tumour invasion into the prostatic stroma (stage T4a in bladder tumours) and for which immediate radical cystoprostatectomy is mandatory. Patients with CIS in the epithelial lining of the prostatic urethra can be treated by intravesical instillation of BCG. Transurethral resection of the prostate can improve contact of BCG with the prostatic urethra [137,369]. However, potential spread of CIS has to be considered; no suprapubic trocar-placed catheter should be used. In patients with prostatic duct involvement there are promising results of BCG, but only from small series. The data are insufficient to provide clear treatment recommendations and radical surgery should be considered [369,370]. 7.4.5.5. Summary of evidence - treatment of carcinoma in situ Summary of evidenceLECarcinoma in situ cannot be cured by an endoscopic procedure alone.4Compared to intravesical chemotherapy, intravesical BCG maintenance instillations increase the complete response rate, the overall percentage of patients who remain disease free, and reduce the risk of tumour progression.1b 