3.11.1. Terminology, classification, epidemiology and pathophysiology. Urinary incontinence in children may be caused by congenital anatomical or neurologic abnormalities such as ectopic ureter, bladder exstrophy or myelomeningocele (MMC). In many children, however, there is no such obvious cause for the incontinence, and they are referred as having functional bladder problems. The most recent International Children’s Continence Society (ICCS) document suggests using the term day-time lower urinary tract (LUT) conditions to group together all functional bladder problems in children. Normal storage and emptying of the bladder at a socially accepted place and time is mostly achieved by age three to four. Children with LUT conditions would present with failure to achieve continence (being still wet after the age of four), urgency, weak stream, hesitancy, frequency and accompanied UTIs. Isolated night-time wetting without any day-time symptoms is known as ‘enuresis’ and considered as a different entity [551]. As different studies have used varying definitions and criteria, it is difficult to give reliable percentages regarding the incidence of this problem. Reported prevalence ranges widely from 1% to 20% [552-560]. Due to increasing awareness and better access to specialised health care, the prevalence seems to be increasing [561,562]. Lower urinary tract conditions in children may be due to disturbances of the filling phase, the voiding phase or a combination of both in varying severity. Mainly the conditions are divided into either overactive bladder (OAB) or dysfunctional voiding. They can, of course, coincide and one may even be causative of the other. Dysfunctional bowel emptying may also be part of the clinical problems and BBD is the term used to cover concomitant bladder and bowel disturbances. Lower urinary tract conditions are considered to be the result of incomplete or delayed maturation of the bladder sphincter complex. The pons is considered to be responsible for detrusor sphincter co-ordination while the cortical area is responsible for inhibition of the micturition reflex and voluntary initiation of micturition. Therefore overactivity would be the result of delayed maturation of cortical control, while dysfunctional voiding would be the result of non-maturation of the co-ordination. Detrusor overactivity should not be considered as a sole bladder based problem but more a symptom of a centrally located dysfunction affecting bladder, bowel and even mood and behaviour [563]. A link between LUT and behavioural disorders such as ADHD (attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder) has also been shown [564-566]. 3.11.1.1. Filling-phase (storage) dysfunctions In filling-phase dysfunctions, the detrusor can be overactive, as in OAB, or underactive, as in underactive bladder (UAB). Overactivity of the bladder is the most common problem, seen mostly around five to seven years of age. This may lead to disturbances characterised by urgency, frequency and at times urgency incontinence. Some children habitually postpone micturition leading to voiding postponement. Therefore, holding manoeuvres such as leg crossing and squatting can often be seen in this group. Recurrent UTIs are common and high-pressure state of the bladder can be a cause of VUR. Constipation can be an additional aetiological factor, which needs to be assessed. In children with an underactive detrusor, voiding occurs with reduced or minimal detrusor contractions with post-void residuals. Urinary tract infections, straining to void, constipation and incontinence is common. Incontinence often occurs when the bladder is over-distended in the form of overflow incontinence. 3.11.1.2. Voiding-phase (emptying) dysfunctions In voiding-phase (emptying), incomplete relaxation or tightening of the sphincteric mechanism and pelvic floor muscles results in staccato voiding pattern (continuous urine flow with periodic reductions in flow rate precipitated by bursts of pelvic floor activity) or an interrupted voiding pattern (unsustained detrusor contractions resulting in infrequent and incomplete voiding, with micturition in fractions). The general term for this condition is dysfunctional voiding and is associated with elevated bladder pressures and PVRs. Symptoms will vary depending on the severity of inco-ordination between bladder and the sphincter. Staccato voiding is in less severe forms and interrupted voiding and straining is in more severe forms. The co-existence of constipation and LUTD and recurrent UTI is well described [567]. There is no evidence to conclude if bladder problems or bowel problems are the leading cause. The prevalence of constipation in older children varies from 5 to 27%. Approximately 90% of them being functional constipation without an organic cause In children with functinal constipation the prevelance of bladder symptoms have been shown to be as high as 64% [568,569]. In incomplete emptying, high voiding pressures generated by bladder working against a functional obstruction caused by non-relaxing sphincter may induce not only UTIs but also VUR. It is been shown that LUTD is more significant for the occurrence of UTI than VUR itself [570]. In the majority of children with dysfunctional voiding the recurrent infections disappear following successful treatment, which confirms the hypothesis that dysfunctional voiding is the main factor responsible for the infections. Spontaneous resolution of VUR may also be seen after successful treatment of dysfunctional voiding. 