3.11.3. Management. The treatment of LUTD involves a multimodal approach, involving strategies such as behavioural modification, and anticholinergic medication along with underlying and potentially complicating conditions such as constipation and UTIs. Behavioural modification, mostly referred to as urotherapy, is a term which covers all non-pharmacological and non-surgical treatment modalities. It includes standardisation of fluid intake, bowel management; timed voiding and basic relaxed voiding education. The child and family are educated about normal bladder function and responses to urgency. Voiding regimens are instituted and UTIs and any constipation are treated. Treatment is aimed at optimising bladder emptying and inducing full relaxation of the urinary sphincter or pelvic floor prior to and during voiding. Strategies to achieve these goals include: Information and demystification, which includes explanation about normal LUT function and how a particular child deviates from normal function.Instructions about what to do about the problem: Regular voiding habits, sound voiding posture, pelvic floor awareness and training to relax pelvic floor and avoiding holding manoeuvres.Lifestyle advice, regarding fluid intake, prevention of constipation, etc.Registration of symptoms and voiding habits using bladder diaries or frequency-volume charts.Support and encouragement via regular follow-up by the caregiver. Recurrent UTIs and constipation should also be treated and prevented during the treatment period. In case of combined BBD it is advised to treat the bowel dysfunction first [561] as LUTS may disappear after successful management of bowel dysfunction. Addition of other strategies, as below, may be needed: Pelvic floor muscle awareness practices with repeated sessions of biofeedback visualisation of uroflow curves and/or pelvic floor activity and relaxation.Clean intermittent self-catheterisation for large PVR volumes of urine.Antimuscarinic drug therapy if detrusor overactivity is present.If the bladder neck is associated with increased resistance to voiding, α-blocker drugs may be introduced. Treatment efficacy can be evaluated by improvement in bladder emptying and resolution of associated symptoms. Controlled studies of the various interventions are needed. As with detrusor overactivity, the natural history of untreated dysfunctional voiding is not well delineated and optimum duration of therapy is poorly described. A high success rate has been described for urotherapy programmes, independent of the components of the programme. However, the evidence level is low as most studies of urotherapy programmes are retrospective and non-controlled [582]. A Cochrane analysis found very little evidence that can help to make evidene-based treatment decisions [583]. 3.11.3.1. Specific interventions As well as urotherapy, there are some specific interventions, including physiotherapy (e.g. pelvic floor exercises), biofeedback, alarm therapy and neuromodulation. Although good results with these treatment modalities have been reported, the level of evidence remains low, since only a few RCTs were published [584-590]. A systematic review reports that biofeedback is an effective, non-invasive method of treating dysfunctional voiding, and approximately 80% of children benefited from this treatment. However, most reports were of low level of evidence and studies of more solid design such as RCTs should be conducted [591]. A more recently published multicentre controlled trial of cognitive treatment, placebo, oxybutynin and bladder and pelvic floor training did not report better results with oxybutynin and pelvic floor training compared to standard urotherapy [581] (LE: 1b). Two RCTs on underactive bladder without neurophatic disease have been published. Transcutaneous interferential electrical stimulation and animated biofeedback with pelvic floor exercise have been shown to be effective [592,593]. In some cases, pharmacotherapy may be added. Some studies on orthosympathicomimetics have been published with a low level of evidence [594]. Overactive bladder is common in the paediatric population. Although a stepwise approach starting with behavioural therapy is advised, antimuscarinic agents remain the mainstay of medical treatment for OAB. Oxybutynin is the most commonly used antimuscarinic in the paediatric population. The response to antimuscarinics varies and many children experience serious side effects. Although there have been reports about the use of tolterodine, fesoterodine, trospium, propiverine, and solifenacin in children, to date, most of them are off-label depending on age and national regulations. A few RCTs have been published, one on tolterodine showed safety but not efficacy [595], while another on propiverine showed both safety and efficacy [596]. The study on solifenacin showed its efficacy with side effects like constipation and electrocardiogram changes [597]. The difference in results is probably due to study design. Despite the low level of evidence for the use of anticholinergics and antimuscarinics, their use is recommended because of the large number of studies reporting a positive effect on OAB symptoms. Although α-blocking agents are used occasionally, an RCT showed no benefit [598]. Botulinum toxin injection seems promising, but can only be used off-label [599]. A meta-analysis reports that neuromodulation therapy may lead to better partial improvement of nonneurogenic OAB; however, it may not render a definitive complete response. Office-based neuromodulation seems more efficacious than self-administered neuromodulation [600]. These new treatment modalities can only be recommended for standard therapy-resistant cases [601]. Despite early successful treatment, there is evidence that there is a high recurrence rate of symptoms in the long term which necessitates long-term follow-up [602]. In addition, many patients may present later in adulthood with different forms of LUTD [603]. 