3.11.2. Diagnostic evaluation. The evaluation of LUT conditions includes medical and voiding history (bladder diaries and structured questionnaires), a physical examination, a urinalysis, and uroflowmetry with PVR. The upper urinary tract (UUT) needs to be evaluated in children with recurrent infections and dysfunctional voiding. Uroflowmetry can be combined with pelvic floor electromyography to demonstrate overactivity of the pelvic floor muscles during voiding. Urodynamic studies are usually reserved for patients with therapy resistant dysfunctional voiding and those not responding to treatment who are being considered for invasive treatment [566,571-574]. In addition to a comprehensive medical history a detailed voiding diary provides documentation of voiding and defecation habits, frequency of micturition, voided volumes, night-time urine output, number and timing of incontinence episodes, and fluid intake. A voiding diary should at least be done for two days, although longer observation periods are preferred. A voiding diary provides information about storage function and incontinence frequency, while a pad test can help to quantify the urine loss. In the paediatric age group, where the history is taken from both the caregivers and child together, a structured approach is recommended using a questionnaire. Many signs and symptoms related to voiding and wetting will be unknown to the caregivers and should be specifically requested, using the questionnaire as a checklist. Some symptom scorings have been developed and validated [575,576]. Although the reliability of questionnaires are limited they are practical in a clinical setting to check the presence of symptoms and have also been shown to be reliable to monitor the response to treatment. History taking should also include assessment of bowel function. For evaluation of bowel function in children, the Bristol Stool Scale is an easy-to-use tool [577,578]. Urinalysis and urinary culture are essential to evaluate for UTI. Since transient voiding symptoms are common in the presence of UTI, exclusion of UTI is essential before further management of symptoms. During clinical examination, genital inspection and observation of the lumbosacral spine and the lower extremities are necessary to exclude obvious uropathy and neuropathy. Uroflowmetry with PVR evaluates the emptying ability, while an UUT US screens for (secondary) anatomical changes. A flow rate which reaches its maximum quickly and levels off (‘tower shape’) may be indicative of over-active bladder whereas interrupted or staccato voiding patterns may be seen in dysfunctional voiding. Plateau uroflowmetry patterns are usually seen in anatomic obstruction of flow. A single uroflowmetry test may not always be representative of the clinical situation and multiple uroflowmetry tests, which all give a similar result, are more reliable. Uroflowmetry examination should be done when there is desire to empty the bladder and the voided volume should at least be 50% of the age-expected capacity [(age in years) + 1] x 30 mL for the children. While testing the child in a clinical environment, the impact of stress and mood changes on bladder function should also be taken into account [579,580]. In the case of treatment failure re-evaluation is warranted and (video)-urodynamic (VUD) studies and neurological evaluation may be considered. Sometimes, there are minor, underlying, urological or neurological problems, which can only be suspected using VUD. In these cases, structured psychological interviews to assess social stress should be added [581] (LE: 1b). Video-urodynamics may also be used as initial investigational tool in patients with suspicion of reflux. In this case reflux may be observed along with bladder dynamics. In the case of anatomical problems, such as posterior urethral valve (PUV) problems, syringocoeles, congenital obstructive posterior urethral membrane (COPUM) or Moormann’s ring, it may be necessary to perform cystoscopy with treatment. If neuropathic disease is suspected, MRI of the lumbosacral spine and medulla can help to exclude tethered cord, lipoma or other rare conditions. 