4.2.4.2. Pharmacological management. 4.2.4.2.1. Oestrogen Oestrogenic drugs including conjugated equine oestrogens, oestradiol, tibolone and raloxifene, are used as hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for women with natural or therapeutic menopause. Oestrogen treatment for SUI have been tested using oral, transdermal, and vaginal routes of administration. Available evidence suggests that vaginal oestrogen treatment with oestradiol and oestriol is not associated with the increased risk of thromboembolism, endometrial hypertrophy, and breast cancer seen with systemic administration [236-238]. Vaginal (local) treatment is primarily used to treat symptoms of vaginal atrophy in postmenopausal women. A Cochrane SR looked at the use of oestrogen therapy in postmenopausal women given local oestrogen therapy and seventeen studies focused on SUI [236]. There is also a narrative review of oestrogen therapy in urogenital diseases [337]. The Cochrane review found that vaginal oestrogen treatment improved symptoms of SUI in the short term [236]. There were small, low-quality trials comparing vaginal oestrogen treatment with phenylpropanolamine, PFMT, ES and its use as an adjunct to surgery for SUI. Local oestrogen was less likely to improve UI than PFMT but no differences in UI outcomes were observed for the other comparisons. A single trial of local oestrogen therapy comparing a ring device to pessaries found no difference in UI outcomes, although more women preferred the ring device. In one trial, no significant adverse effects following vaginal administration of oestradiol for vulvovaginal atrophy over a two year period were reported [338]. Vaginal oestrogen therapy can be given as conjugated equine oestrogen, oestriol or oestradiol in vaginal pessaries, vaginal rings, or creams. The ideal treatment duration and the long-term effects are uncertain. A review of local oestrogen treatment showed improvement of UI over placebo with vaginal rings, which were favoured subjectively over pessaries [339]. One RCT in postmenopausal women showed a benefit of adding intravaginal oestriol to vaginal ES and PFMT in female SUI [340]. Studies of systemic HRT with non-urogenital primary outcomes have looked for change in urinary continence in secondary analyses. Large trials using conjugated equine oestrogens showed a higher rate of development or worsening of UI compared to placebo and no SUI improvement [341-346]. In a single RCT, use of raloxifene was not associated with development or worsening of UI [347]. Two small RCTs using oral oestriol or oestradiol as HRT for vulvovaginal atrophy suggested that UI symptoms were improved although the evidence was unclear [66,348]. 4.2.4.2.1.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for oestrogens Summary of evidenceLEVaginal oestrogen therapy improves SUI for postmenopausal women in the short term.1aNeoadjuvant or adjuvant use of local oestrogens is ineffective as an adjunct to surgery for SUI.2bSystemic HRT using conjugated equine oestrogens does not improve SUI and may worsenpre-existing UI.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer vaginal oestrogen therapy to postmenopausal women with stress urinary incontinence (SUI) and symptoms of vulvovaginal atrophy.StrongIn women taking oral conjugated equine oestrogen as hormone replacement therapy (HRT) who develop or experience worsening SUI, discuss alternative HRT.Strong 4.2.4.2.2. Duloxetine Duloxetine inhibits the presynaptic reuptake of neurotransmitters, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) and noradrenaline (NE). In the sacral spinal cord, an increased concentration of 5-HT and NE in the synaptic cleft increases stimulation of 5-HT and NE receptors on the pudendal motor neurons, which in turn increases the resting tone and contraction strength of the urethral striated sphincter. Duloxetine was evaluated as a treatment for female SUI or MUI in three SRs [171,349,350]. Improvement in UI compared to placebo was observed with no clear differences between SUI and MUI. One study reported cure for UI in 10% of patients. An improvement in the UI QoL questionnaire was not found in the study, which used this as a primary endpoint. In a further study comparing duloxetine, 80 mg daily, with PFMT alone,PFMT + duloxetine, and placebo [351], duloxetine reduced leakage compared to PFMT or no treatment. Global improvement and QoL were better for combined therapy than no treatment. There was no significant difference between PFMT and no treatment in this trial. Two open-label studies with a follow-up of > 1 year evaluated the long-term effect of duloxetine in controlling SUI [352,353]. Both studies had a high patient withdrawal rate, due to lack of efficacy and a high incidence of adverse events, including nausea and vomiting (> 40% of patients), dry mouth, constipation, dizziness, insomnia, somnolence, and fatigue. A SR showed significant efficacy for duloxetine compared to placebo in women with SUI, but with increased risk of adverse events [350]. The adverse effects of duloxetine include mental health problems and suicidal ideation. A meta-analysis of four RCTs including 1,910 women with SUI reported no suicidality, violence, or akathisia events, but suggested that discontinuation rate due to adverse events was around one in seven and that the harm may outweigh the benefit of treatment [354]. A meta-analysis of twelve placebo-controlled trials involving almost 3,000 patients showed that in patients with major depressive disorders there were no significant differences in the incidence of suicide-related events with duloxetine vs. placebo [355]. 4.2.4.2.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for duloxetine Summary of evidenceLEDuloxetine improves SUI in women, but the chances of cure are low.1aDuloxetine may cause significant gastrointestinal and central nervous system adverse effects, leading to a high rate of treatment discontinuation, although these symptoms may be limited to the first weeks of treatment.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer duloxetine (where licensed) to selected patients with stress urinary incontinence unresponsive to other conservative treatments and who want to avoid invasive treatment, counselling carefully about the risk of adverse events.StrongDuloxetine should be initiated and withdrawn using dose titration because of the high risk of adverse events.Strong 4.2.4.2.3. Adrenergic agonists A Cochrane SR including 22 RCTs involving 673 women and seven different adrenergic drugs (phenylpropanolamine in eleven trials, midodrine in two, norepinephrine in three, clenbuterol in another three, terbutaline in one, eskornade in one and Ro 115-1240 in one) found weak evidence that adrenergic agonists may improve SUI. Moreover, side effects did occur but were usually minor. More evidence is needed to compare adrenergic drugs with other drugs for SUI and, also with PFMT [356]. 