6.1. Treatment of the primary tumour. Besides its role in sexual functioning and urination, a fully functional penis is central to a patient’s sense of wholeness, desirability and masculinity. Hence, the aims of the treatment of the primary tumour are complete tumour removal with as much organ preservation as possible, without compromising oncological control. There are no RCTs or observational comparative studies for any of the treatment options for localised penile cancer. Penile preservation appears to be superior in functional and cosmetic outcomes as compared to partial or total penectomy and is considered to be the primary treatment method for localised penile cancer, based on retrospective studies. Histological diagnosis and local staging must be obtained before non-surgical treatments can be considered. For small tumours, excisional biopsy can equal treatment, while for larger lesions which necessitate more complex or mutilating surgery, an incisional biopsy is advised (see Section 3.4.6). Histology provides confirmation of the diagnosis before treatment and informs on the risk group of the primary tumour which has important consequences for invasive staging of the groins. With surgical treatment, negative surgical margins for invasive carcinoma must be obtained. Treatment of the primary tumour and of the regional nodes can either be simultaneous or staged. Local treatment modalities for small and localised penile cancer include topical therapy, laser ablation, excisional surgery, external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) and brachytherapy. Unfortunately, the SR of the Guidelines Panel revealed a complete absence of both RCTs and prospective trials assessing and comparing the effectiveness of interventions for managing the primary tumour [3]. Treatment recommendations can therefore only be based on retrospective data and expert opinion. In the absence of comparative evidence supporting treatment modalities, patients should be informed about all appropriate treatment options for their specific tumour and situation, and the potential advantages and disadvantages for each technique which are discussed per disease stage in the following sections. 