6.1.3. Locally advanced disease (T3–T4). 6.1.3.1. Resectable disease In cT2 disease where there is doubt of corporeal or tunica albuginea invasion, rather than continuing the dissection over Buck’s fascia to perform glansectomy combined with distal corporectomy, dissection superficial to the tunica albuginea can be adopted after dividing the neurovascular bundle. In these instances, frozen sections of the corporeal tips and urethra may be helpful in assessing the radicality of the procedure peri-operatively. Pre-operative MRI or US can assist in surgical planning as discussed in Chapter 5. For cT3 patients with obvious involvement of the corpora cavernosa, partial amputation is standard. Patients can be offered reconstructive options such as urethral centralisation and/or neo-glans formation with the use of a graft. Two studies in higher-risk patients treated with radical glansectomy or partial penectomy show that local recurrence in these instances is associated with poor survival. Patients should be informed that a wider resection (i.e., partial or radical penectomy) provides a lower risk of local recurrence at the cost of functionality of the penis [145,177]. Radical amputation and diversion of urination with a perineal urethrostomy is reserved for those patients in whom a resection with a safe margin would result in the inability to void standing upright or without wetting the scrotum. Radiotherapy for locally-advanced penile lesions should be undertaken with concurrent chemotherapy. As with disease in the LNs, traditional radiotherapy dosing recommendations are being reconsidered [178]. Complex treatment planning will be necessary in most cases of T3–T4 primary lesions, with patient-unique immobilization to spare testes and scrotum. A total phallic reconstruction may be offered to patients undergoing total/subtotal amputation. Extensive partial amputation with wide margins or total penectomy with perineal urethrostomy is the standard advisable treatment. In case of locally-advanced and ulcerated cases which are resectable, composite myocutaneous flaps or advancement flaps may be needed to cover the surgical defect [179]. 6.1.3.2. Non-resectable disease In non-resectable disease, induction chemotherapy offers the ability to downstage disease and thereby enable surgical resection among responders, even among men with advanced penile cancer. Several retrospective- and prospective series have evaluated the effects of combination regimens using paclitaxel or docetaxel with cisplatin and ifosfamide or 5-FU. The combination of irinotecan and cisplatinum, and vinflunine as monotherapy, have also been investigated. Although there is considerable heterogeneity in the regimens and cohorts combining advanced nodal disease and unresectable primary tumours, objective responses are observed in 29–60% of patients [177,180-186] . In two recent SRs pooled ORR were 53–57% [187] with pooled objective response rates of 57% (95% CI: 46–67%) for taxane-platinum combinations and 54% (95% CI: 31–76%) for non-taxane platinum combinations [188], and pathological complete responses in 4–10% [188], at the cost of considerable toxicity. This approach is discussed in more detail in Section 6.4.1.1. In case of not obtaining a response sufficient for resection, palliative chemo-radiotherapy is an option. Accumulated evidence in anal and vulvar cancer supports the notion that definitive chemo-radiotherapy is an effective treatment for anogenital SCC [189]. In a single study in six node-positive SCC penile cancer patients, 4 of the 6 patients were recurrence-free and two had developed recurrence, of which one patient died [189]. In a currently unpublished observational cohort study in 40 loco-regionally advanced penile cancer patients fit for chemo-radiotherapy and treated with curative intent, Ottenhof and colleagues observed that only half of the patients proceeded to surgery, and one- and 2-year PFS was 32% with a > grade 3 toxicity rate of 40% [190]. Their regimen consisted of integrated boost intensity modulated radiotherapy with a dose of 59.5 Gy to the primary tumour in fractions of 1.8 Gy with mitomycin C on day one and capecitabin on radiation days. In comparison to peri-operative chemotherapy studies, the omission of surgery is a potential advantage of chemo-radiotherapy. As this strategy has only been evaluated in a single observational study without a published full text at the moment of writing, no recommendation can be made supporting this approach in patients suitable for other options. 