7.7. Primary treatment by disease type. The type of further therapy after TURB should be based on the risk groups shown in Section 6.3 and Table 6.1. The stratification and treatment recommendations are primarily based on the risk of disease progression (Table 6.2). In some instances, mainly in intermediate-risk tumours, the 2006 EORTC scoring model is useful (Section 6.1.1.1) to determine a patient’s individual risk of disease recurrence as the basis to decide further treatment on. Treatment of low-risk disease Patients in the low-risk group have a negligible risk of disease progression. The single post-operative instillation of chemotherapy reduces the risk of recurrence and is considered as sufficient treatment in these patients. Treatment of intermediate-risk disease Patients in the intermediate-risk group have a relatively low risk of disease progression (7.4 and 8.5% after 10 years according to the 2021 EAU NMIBC scoring model). In these patients induction chemotherapy with or without maintenance for a maximum of one year is a reasonable first-line option in the majority of patients. One-year full-dose BCG treatment (induction plus 3-weekly instillations at 3, 6 and 12 months), is an alternative option. The final choice should reflect the individual patient’s risk of recurrence and progression as well as the efficacy and side effects of each treatment modality. Treatment of high-risk disease Patients in the high-risk group have a high risk of disease progression (14% after 10 years according to the 2021 EAU NMIBC scoring model). In these patients full-dose intravesical BCG for one to 3 years (induction plus 3-weekly instillations at 3, 6, 12, 18, 24, 30 and 36 months), is indicated. The additional beneficial effect of the second and third years of maintenance should be weighed against its added costs, side effects and problems associated with BCG shortage. Because of the high risk of progression, immediate RC may also be discussed with the patient. Radical cystectomy is the safest approach from an oncological point of view, it is, however, associated with the risk of complications and QoL impairment and represents over-treatment in some patients. Treatment of very high-risk disease Patients in the very high-risk group have an extremely high risk of tumour progression (53.1 and 58.6% after 10 years according to the 2021 EAU NMIBC scoring model). Immediate RC should be discussed with these patients. In case RC is not feasible or refused by the patient, full-dose intravesical BCG for one to 3 years should be offered. Treatment of carcinoma in situ Patients with carcinoma in situ cannot be managed by an endoscopic procedure alone and should be offered either intravesical BCG instillations or RC. BCG treatment of CIS increases the complete response rate, the overall percentage of patients who remain disease free, and reduces the risk of tumour progression. In comparison, immediate RC for CIS results in excellent tumour-specific survival rates although a large proportion of patients might be over-treated [232]. 