4.1. TNM classification. The 8th edition of the UICC/AJCC TNM is the currently used classification system for penile cancer which was last updated in 2017 [73,83] Compared to the previous (7th) edition, some changes were introduced. The T1 category is stratified into two different risk groups depending on the absence or presence of lymphovascular invasion, perineural invasion, or poor differentiation (T1a vs. T1b, respectively, see Table 4.1) [84]. Furthermore, invasion into the urethra was previously classified as T3 disease. However, a tumour near the meatus may directly invade into the distal urethra through the corpus spongiosum, which is not associated with worse outcome. In addition, previous studies have shown that corpus spongiosum invasion is associated with a lower incidence of inguinal LN metastasis and has better survival compared to corpus cavernosum invasion. Therefore, invasion into the corpus spongiosum and corpus cavernosum is classified into T2 and T3, respectively [85,86]. Patients with T4 tumours have extension into adjacent tissues (e.g., prepubic fat, scrotum, spermatic cord, pubic bone, prostate). The pN1 category was modified to include up to two unilateral inguinal LN metastases, while the pN2 category was modified to be three or more unilateral, or any bilateral LN metastases. This was based on data showing poor outcomes in cases involving three or more unilateral or bilateral LNs compared with those involving one or two unilateral LNs [86,87]. pN3 stage is defined as pelvic nodes (uni- or bilateral) or presence of extranodal extension (ENE) (inguinal or pelvic, regardless of the number of LN metastases) [73,83]. Further retroperitoneal LN spread cranial to the pelvic template is classified as extra-regional and therefore as distant metastases. Table 4.1: UICC/AJCC 8th edition TNM clinical and pathological classification of penile cancer [73,83] Clinical classificationT - Primary TumourTXPrimary tumour cannot be assessedT0No evidence of primary tumourTisCarcinoma in situ (Penile Intraepithelial Neoplasia – PeIN)TaNon-invasive verrucous carcinoma*T1Tumour invades subepithelial connective tissueT1aTumour invades subepithelial connective tissue without lymphovascular invasion or perineural invasion and is not poorly differentiatedT1bTumour invades subepithelial connective tissue with lymphovascular invasion or perineural invasion or is poorly differentiatedT2Tumour invades corpus spongiosum with or without invasion of the urethraT3Tumour invades corpus cavernosum with or without invasion of the urethraT4Tumour invades other adjacent structuresN - Regional Lymph NodescNXRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessedcN0No palpable or visibly enlarged inguinal lymph nodescN1Palpable mobile unilateral inguinal lymph nodecN2Palpable mobile multiple or bilateral inguinal lymph nodescN3Fixed inguinal nodal mass or pelvic lymphadenopathy, unilateral or bilateralM - Distant MetastasiscM0No distant metastasiscM1Distant metastasisPathological classificationThe pT categories correspond to the clinical T categories.The pN categories are based upon biopsy or surgical excisionpN - Regional Lymph NodespNXRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessedpN0No regional lymph node metastasispN1Metastasis in one or two inguinal lymph nodespN2Metastasis in more than two unilateral inguinal nodes or bilateral inguinal lymph nodespN3Metastasis in pelvic lymph node(s), unilateral or bilateral or extranodal extension of regional lymph node metastasispM - Distant MetastasispM1Distant metastasis microscopically confirmedG - Histopathological GradingGXGrade of differentiation cannot be assessedG1Well differentiatedG2Moderately differentiatedG3G4Poorly differentiatedUndifferentiated *Including verrucous carcinoma. 