8.2.2. Diagnostic evaluation. The initial evaluation aims to obtain information on the presenting symptoms and their duration (e.g., pain on erection, palpable nodules, deformity, length and girth and erectile function). It is important to obtain information on the distress caused by the symptoms and the potential risk factors for ED and PD. A disease-specific questionnaire (Peyronie’s disease questionnaire [PDQ]) has been developed for use in clinical practice and trials. The Peyronie’s disease questionnaire measures three domains, including psychological and physical symptoms, penile pain and symptom bother [868]. Clinicians should take a focused history to distinguish between active and stable disease, as this will influence medical treatment and the timing of surgery. Patients who are still likely to have active disease are those with a shorter symptom duration, pain on erection, or a recent change in penile deformity. Resolution of pain and stability of the curvature for at least three months are accepted criteria of disease stabilisation as well as patients’ referral for specific medical therapy [869,870] or surgical intervention, if indicated [871]. The examination should start with a focused genital assessment that is extended to the hands and feet for detecting possible Dupuytren’s contracture or Ledderhose scarring of the plantar fascia [872]. A penile examination is performed to assess the presence of a palpable nodule or plaque. There is no correlation between plaque size and degree of curvature [873]. Measurement of the stretched or erect penile length is important because it may have an impact on the subsequent treatment decisions and potential medico-legal implications [874-876]. An objective assessment of penile curvature with an erection is mandatory. This can be obtained by several approaches, including home (self) photography of a natural erection (preferably), using a vacuum-assisted erection test or an ICI using vasoactive agents. However, it has been suggested that the ICI method is superior, as it can induce an erection similar to or better than that which the patient would experience when sexually aroused [877-879]. Computed tomography and MRI have a limited role in the diagnosis of the curvature and are not recommended on a routine basis. Erectile function can be assessed using validated instruments such as the IIEF although this has not been validated in PD patients [880]. Erectile dysfunction is common in patients with PD (30-70.6%) [881,882]. The presence of ED and psychological factors may also have a profound impact on the chosen treatment strategy [883]. Ultrasound measurement of plaque size is not accurate but may be helpful to assess the presence of the plaque and its calcification and location [884,885]. Doppler US may be used for the assessment of penile haemodynamics and ED aetiology [882]. In particular to assess penile arterial inflow in the context of the interventional modality to be undertaken (eg plaque incision and grafting) to exclude arteriogenic ED. 8.2.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for diagnosis of Peyronie’s disease Summary of evidenceLEUltrasound measurement of plaque size is inaccurate and operator-dependent.3Doppler US may be used to assess penile haemodynamic and vascular anatomy.2aIntracavernous injection method is superior to other methods in providing an objective assessment of penile curvature with an erection.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingTake a medical and sexual history of patients with Peyronie’s disease (PD), including duration of the disease, pain on erection, penile deformity, difficulty in vaginal/anal intromission due to the deformity and erectile dysfunction (ED).StrongPerform a physical examination, including assessment of palpable plaques, stretched or erect penile length, degree of curvature (self-photography, vacuum-assisted erection test or pharmacological-induced erection) and any other related diseases (e.g., Dupuytren’s contracture, Ledderhose disease) in patients with PD.StrongUse the intracavernous injection (IC) method in the diagnostic work-up of PD to provide an objective assessment of penile curvature with an erection.WeakUse the PD specific questionnaire especially in clinical trials, but routine use in daily clinical practice is not mandatory.WeakDo not use ultrasound (US), computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging to assess plaque size and deformity in routine clinical practice.WeakUse penile Doppler US in the case of diagnostic evaluation of ED, to evaluate penile haemodynamic and vascular anatomy, and to assess location and calcification of plaques, especially prior to surgery.Weak 