8.2.3.1.2. Intralesional treatment. Injection of pharmacologically active agents directly into penile plaques represents another treatment option. It allows a localised delivery of a pharmacological agent that provides higher concentrations of the drug inside the plaque. However, delivery of the compound to the target area is difficult to ensure, particularly when a dense or calcified plaque is present. Calcium channel antagonists: verapamil and nicardipine The rationale for intralesional use of channel antagonists in patients with PD is based on in vitro research [898,899]. Due to the use of different dosing schedules and the contradictory results obtained in published studies, the evidence is not strong enough to support the clinical use of injected channel blockers verapamil and nicardipine and the results do not demonstrate a meaningful improvement in penile curvature compared to placebo [900-905]. In fact, most of the studies did not perform direct statistical comparisons between these groups. Collagenase of Clostridium histolyticum Collagenase of Clostridium histolyticum (CCH) is a chromatographically purified bacterial enzyme that selectively targets collagen, the primary component of the PD plaque [906-909]. Intralesional injection of CCH has been used in the treatment of PD since 1985. In 2014 the EMA approved CCH for the non-surgical treatment of the stable phase of PD in men with palpable dorsal plaques in whom abnormal curvature of 30-90o and non-ventrally located plaques are present. It should be administered by a healthcare professional who is experienced and properly trained in the administration of CCH treatment for PD [910,911]. However, CCH has been officially withdrawn from the European market by its manufacturer. Despite this the evidence and recommendations for CCH have been maintained by the Guidelines for completeness. The original treatment protocol in all studies consists of two injections of 0.58 mg of CCH 24-72 hours apart every six weeks for up to four cycles. Data from IMPRESS (Investigation for Maximal Peyronie´s Reduction Efficacy and Safety Studies) II and II studies [976], as well as post-approval trials [912], which demonstrated the efficacy and safety of this treatment, are summarised in Table 8.2 online Appendix 5. The average improvement in curvature was 34% compared to 18.2% in the placebo group. Three adverse events of corporeal rupture were surgically repaired. The greatest chance of curvature improvement was for curvatures between 30° and 60°, longer duration of disease, IIEF > 17, and no calcification [870]. An 18.2% improvement from baseline in the placebo arm was also observed. These findings raise questions regarding the proposed role of plaque injection and penile modelling, regardless of the medication, in improving outcomes in men with PD as the placebo or modelling arm resulted in relatively high curvature reduction compared to the treatment arm. The conclusion of the IMPRESS I and II studies is that CCH improves PD both physically and psychologically [913]. A post hoc meta-analysis of the IMPRESS studies demonstrated better results in patients with curvatures < 60o, > 2 years of onset, no calcification in the plaque and good erectile function [912]. Thereafter, a modified short protocol consisting of administration of a single (0.9 mg, one vial) injection per cycle distributed along three lines around the point of maximum curvature up to three cycles, separated by 4-weekly intervals, has been proposed and rapidly popularised replacing physician modelling with a multi-modal approach through penile stretching, modelling and VED at home [914]. The results from this modified protocol were comparable to the results of the IMPRESS trials and appeared to decrease the cost and duration of treatment, although these studies were non-randomised. However, these results were further explored in a prospective non-randomised multi-centre study [982]. In another large single-arm multi-centre clinical study using the shortened protocol, longer PD duration, greater baseline PC and basal and dorsal plaque location were identified as clinically significant predictors of treatment success [915]. Accordingly, a nomogram developed to predict treatment success after CCH for PD showed that patients with longer PD duration, greater baseline penile curvature and basal plaque location had a greater chance of treatment success [915]; however, these findings need to be externally validated. Regarding safety concerns, most PD patients treated with CCH experienced at least one mild or moderate adverse event localised to the penis (penile haematoma (50.2%), penile pain (33.5%), penile swelling (28.9%) and injection site pain (24.1%), which resolved spontaneously within 14 days of injection [916]. The adverse reaction profile was similar after each injection, regardless of the number of injections administered. Serious treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) (0.9%) included penile haematoma and corporeal rupture that require surgical treatment. According to IMPRESS data and the shortened protocol, to prevent serious TEAEs men should be advised to avoid sexual intercourse in the four weeks following injection. Recent preliminary data suggest that treatment in the acute phase of the disease is effective and safe [880,917-921]. In conclusion, CCH is a safe and established treatment for stable-phase disease wit more recent evidence suggesting that CCH also has a role in affecting the progression of active-phase disease. It should also be noted that there is a large effect of traction or modelling in controlled studies, whilst studies reporting on modified protocols have small numbers of patients and are largely uncontrolled. Therefore, patients should be counselled fully on the efficacy of collagenase and the high cost of treatment. It has been suggested that those patients with severe curvature may also benefit from CCH injections because of a potential downgrading of the penile curvature: a decrease in curvature may allow for a penile plication procedure instead of a plaque incision and grafting procedure, therefore avoiding the more negative impact on erectile function from plaque incision and grafting. However, further studies are required to validate these initial findings [880,921]. Interferon α-2b Intralesional injections (5x10^6 units of IFN-α2b in 10 mL saline every 2 weeks over 12 weeks for a total of six injections) significantly improved penile curvature, plaque size and density, and pain compared to placebo. Additionally, penile blood flow parameters are benefited by IFN-α2b [911,922,923]. Regardless of plaque location, IFN-α2b is an effective treatment option. Treatment with IFN-α2b provides a > 20% reduction in curvature in most men with PD, independent of plaque location [924]. Given the mild adverse effects, which include sinusitis and flu-like symptoms, which can be effectively treated with NSAIDs before IFN-α2b injection, and the moderate strength of data available, IFN-α2b is currently recommended for treatment of stable-phase PD. Steroids, hyaluronic acid and botulinum toxin (botox) In the only single-blind, placebo-controlled study with intralesional administration of betamethasone, no statistically significant changes in penile deformity, penile plaque size, and penile pain during erection were reported [925]. Adverse effects include tissue atrophy, thinning of the skin and immunosuppression [926]. The effect of hyaluronic acid treatment in patients with PD was investigated in a non-randomised study; intralesional injection of hyaluronic acid was compared to intralesional verapamil in acute phase PD and significant improvement of pain, curvature and IIEF-15 were observed [927]. In an RCT, oral administration of hyaluronic acid combined with intralesional injection was found to be superior to intralesional injection only and an improvement of 7.8±3.9 degrees in curvature and reduction in plaque size of 3.0 mm was observed [928]. There is only a single study evaluating intralesional botox injections in men with PD; therefore, there is insufficient evidence to support this treatment in clinical practice [929]. Platelet Rich Plasma (PRP) Few studies in humans have evaluated the effect of PRP on penile curvature, plaque size, PDQ and IIEF [930-935]. The effect of PRP in patients with PD remains to be proven and should be considered experimental. An ongoing phase 2b randomized placebo-controlled crossover trial has enrolled 25 patients with a planned target of 80 men with PD: first ongoing data on nine patients in the treatment group vs eight in the placebo group showed no difference in curvature at three months in comparison to baseline [936]. 