8.2.3.1.4. Other treatments. Extracorporeal shockwave treatment The mechanism of action involved in ESWT for PD is still unclear. Four RCTs and one meta-analysis [941-945] assessed the efficacy of ESWT for PD. Three were sham-controlled trials while one compared ESWT with the combination of ESWT and PDE5I (tadalafil) [946]. All trials showed positive findings in terms of pain relief, but no effect on penile curvature and plaque size. Inclusion criteria varied widely among studies and further investigation is needed. Therefore, ESWT should not be used as a primary treatment for penile curvature in men with PD. The results are summarised in Table 8.4 online Appendix 5. Penile traction therapy In men with PD, potential mechanisms for disease modification with penile traction therapy (PTT) have been proposed, including collagen remodelling via decreased myofibroblast activity and matrix metalloproteinase up-regulation [947,948]. The stated clinical goals of PTT are to non-surgically reduce curvature, enhance girth, and recover lost length, which are attractive to patients with PD. However, clinical evidence is limited due to the small number of patients included (267 in total), the heterogeneity in the study designs, and the non-standardised inclusion and exclusion criteria which make it impossible to draw any definitive conclusions about this therapy [949-953]. Most of the included patients will need further treatment to ameliorate their curvature for satisfactory sexual intercourse. Moreover, the effect of PTT in patients with calcified plaques, hourglass or hinge deformities which are, theoretically, less likely to respond to PTT has not been systematically studied. In addition, the treatment can result in discomfort and be inconvenient as the device needs to be used for an extended period (2-8 hours daily), but has been shown to be tolerated by highly-motivated patients. There were no reported serious adverse effects, including skin changes, ulcerations, hypo-aesthesia or diminished rigidity [951,954]. In conclusion, PTT seems to be effective and safe for patients with PD [955], but there is still lack of evidence to give any definitive recommendation in terms of its use as a monotherapy for PD. Vacuum erection device Vacuum erection device (VED) therapy results in dilation of cavernous sinuses, decreased retrograde venous blood flow and increased arterial inflow [956]. Intracorporeal molecular markers are affected by VED application, including decreases in hypoxia-inducible factor-1α, TGF-β1, collagenase, and apoptosis, and increases in endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and α-smooth muscle actin, given their role in the pathogenesis of PD [957]. Only two retrospective studies assessed the efficacy of VED therapy in mechanically straightening the penile curvature of PD as monotherapy and further studies are needed [958,959]. Multimodal treatment There is some evidence suggesting that a combination of different oral agents can be used for the treatment of the acute phase of PD. However, there does not seem to be a consensus on which drugs to combine or the optimum drug dosage; nor has there been a comparison of different drug combinations. A long-term study assessing the role of multimodal medical therapy (injectable verapamil associated with antioxidants and local diclofenac) demonstrated that treatment was efficacious to treat PD patients. It concluded that combination therapy reduced pain more effectively than verapamil alone, making this specific combination treatment more effective compared to monotherapy [957]. Furthermore, combination protocols including injectable therapies, such as CCH, have been studied in controlled trials. The addition of adjunctive PTT and VED has been described; however, limited data are available regarding their use [960]. Penile traction therapy has been evaluated as an adjunct therapy to intralesional injections with interferon, verapamil, or CCH [901,961,962]. These studies have failed to demonstrate significant improvements in penile length or curvature, except for one subset analysis identifying a 0.4 cm length increase among men using the devices for > 3 hours/day [962]. A meta-analysis demonstrated that men who used PTT as an adjunct to surgery or injection therapy for PD had, on average, an increase in stretched penile length (SPL) of 1 cm compared to men who did not use adjunctive PTT. There was no significant change in curvature between the two groups [963]. Data available on the combined treatment of CCH and the use of VED between injection intervals have shown significant mean improvements in curvature (-17o) and penile length (+0.4 cm) after treatment. However, it is not possible to determine the isolated effect of VED because of a lack of control groups [914,963]. Also, a combination of PDE5I (sildenafil 25 mg twice daily) after CCH treatment (shortened protocol combined with VED) is superior to CCH alone for improving penile curvature and erectile function [964]. Further studies are necessary to externally validate those findings. 