6.1.2. Treatment of invasive disease confined to the glans (cT1/T2). When feasible, small and localised invasive lesions should receive organ-sparing treatment. Resection of the primary lesion not only eradicates all disease in localised invasive tumours but also provides definitive pathological staging without the risk of understaging and of missing intra-tumour heterogeneity encountered with incisional or punch biopsy [10]. Foreskin tumours are treated by ‘radical’ circumcision. For glandular and coronal lesions, wide local excision, partial glansectomy or total glansectomy with reconstruction, are surgical options while additional circumcision is advised in glandular tumours. External beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy are radiotherapeutic options for these patients. Laser therapy of small lesions has been reported but the risk of invasive disease must be recognised, and the recurrence risk is high, possibly as a result of the limited tissue penetration depth of laser ablation. Further research is needed to better establish the comparative safety and effectiveness of surgical and nonsurgical therapies for penile cancer. Treatment choice depends on tumour size, histology, stage and grade, localisation and patient preference. Over the recent decades, a shift towards organ-sparing surgery has been observed, based on the assumption that local recurrence has little influence on long-term survival. However, in a large series looking at higher-risk tumours treated with glansectomy [145] or partial penectomy [146], it was observed that patients experiencing local recurrence have poorer survival, also in multivariate analysis correcting for poor prognosticators. This, however, does not indicate that these patients may have fared better with more radical excision, as local recurrence in those cases may be a display of a more aggressive disease biology in general. On the other hand, large series are available showing lower local recurrence rates after amputative surgery despite more aggressive tumours, supporting a wider resection [147]. The SR by the Panel found a cumulative 5-year recurrence free rate (RFR) of 82% in case series and 76.7% in non-RCTs for organ-sparing surgery. Similarly, the cumulative 5-year RFR of amputative surgery is reported 83.9% in case series and 93.3% in controlled studies. These variations reflect the differences of study designs as well as the different cohorts analysed at each instance; a larger proportion of patients treated with amputative surgery typically present with advanced disease (> T3: 29.4% vs. < T3: 7.8%). The higher RFRs observed after amputative surgery needs to be weighed against the impact on sexual function and QoL. Hence, the limits of organ-sparing surgery are not completely clear, and the higher risks of local recurrence should be discussed with the patient when making a treatment plan. 