6.1.2.7. Glansectomy. Patients with tumours confined to the glans and prepuce that are not eligible for wide local excision or glans resurfacing are good candidates for glansectomy. Patients with poor vascular function, diabetes, immunosuppression, or previous radiation to the groin area are less suitable for graft application due to higher failure rates which should be discussed with the patient when making the decision between graft application for primary closure. For cases in which the lesion is confined to the glans and is clearly away from the corporal tips according to imaging or clinical examination, an approach that uses dissection over Bucks’ fascia can be used to excise the glans, while in cases of doubt, a plane under the Bucks fascia can be used. In the Panel’s SR, glansectomy with or without resection of the outermost tips of the corpora cavernosa was assessed in six studies including 1,681 men, 86.4% of whom with T1–T2 disease. The 5-year RFR ranged from 78.0–95.8% [3]. A split-thickness skin graft is commonly used to reconstruct a neo-glans and the graft loss rate was 1.5–23.5%. The incidence of meatal stenosis in a recent SR was 2.8–14.3%. Good cosmetic outcomes and normal erections were reported in 95–100% and 50–100% of cases, respectively [159]. In a large retrospective study by Roussel and colleagues, describing a multicentre cohort including 230 pT1, 534 pT2 and 108 pT3 patients treated in high-volume centres, the authors found high-grade disease and pT3 to be independent risk factors predicting local recurrence. Three-year local RFS rates were 94.8%, 87.3% and 69.7% in patients with no, one, or both, risk factors, respectively. Moreover, in this population, local recurrence remained a significant predictor of decreased overall- and CSS, even when excluding margin-positive cases, patients with pT3 disease, and patients with clinical LN involvement. Hence, these issues should be discussed with the patient prior to surgical intervention when choosing between glansectomy and the more aggressive partial penectomy. 