11.6. Risk-stratified proposals during follow-up after urethral surgery. Cost of follow-up after urethroplasty is higher in the first year after the procedure [589]. In a literature review it ranged between 205 to 1,784 US Dollars, with higher costs associated to posterior urethral repairs [589]. As the risk of recurrence and side effects are related to the type of stricture and urethroplasty, a different follow-up schedule was proposed and shown to be cost-effective in the USA, potentially saving up to 85% of costs after five years [561]: Urethroplasties with a low risk of recurrence (EPA urethroplasty without history of radiotherapy, hypospadias, or LS features) could be safely followed up based on monitoring of symptoms, using selfadministered IPSS questionnaire, every three months for one year, and annually thereafter.Urethroplasties with standard risk of recurrence (urethroplasty using grafts, flaps, and/or post-irradiation, hypospadias and/or LS patients) could combine IPSS questionnaire + flowmetry every three months for one year, and annually thereafter. Additionally, RUG at three and twelve months should be performed. In this protocol, urethrocystoscopy is only performed if required [561]. Another suggested follow-up protocol includes urethrocystoscopy or RUG/VCUG at three months post-operatively, in order to rule out early failures, especially in case of graft use. If there is evidence of good anatomical outcome in these tests, flowmetry and questionnaire results at three months should be considered as the new baseline. Thereafter, follow-up could be safely and routinely performed with non-invasive tests (flowmetry – evaluating Qmax and the shape of curve – and questionnaires). Any deterioration should be further investigated with a urethrocystoscopy [577]. A recently suggested protocol also included assessment of LUTS, sexual function (erectile and ejaculatory), and LUT pain, that need to be compared with pre-operative findings which should include a PROM questionnaire [560]. Cystoscopy and flowmetry should be performed between three to six months postoperatively, and flowmetry findings should be considered as the new baseline for longitudinal follow-up. Future significant decline (25-30%) in Qmax or Qmax - (average flow rate) should trigger new cystoscopy to rule out anatomic recurrence, even in patients who are symptom-free [560]. A routine cystoscopy at twelve to fifteen months should be performed at the surgeon’s discretion, based on risk assessment of three aspects: higher-risk patients, evidence of partial urethral narrowing at three-month assessment, low-volume surgeons [560]. Summary of evidenceLEThe higher percentage of recurrences presents during the first twelve months, after urethroplasty surgery.2aRisk-adjusted follow-up protocols are cost-effective and safe for the patients.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer a routine follow-up of at least one year after urethroplasty.StrongAdopt a risk-adjusted follow-up protocol.Weak 