6.3.5.1.3.3. Radiation/high-energy induced posterior strictures. 6.3.5.1.3.3.1.Bulbomembranous strictures secondary to radiation/high energy sources The major challenge in treating radiation-induced strictures is the consequent tissue damage with impaired healing capacity, involving not only the stricture itself but also the adjacent proximal and distal areas of the scar [421]. Additionally, proximity of the stricture to the external sphincter can further complicate surgery [421]. Due to these challenges, patients with radiation-induced BMS have long been considered poor candidates for urethral reconstruction and have been treated with urinary diversion if endoscopic treatments failed or were not possible [421]. Most radiation-induced BMS are short and in these cases, EPA is possible avoiding the use of a graft or a local flap in an area of poor vascular health. However, EPA will not be possible for BMS with a long bulbar segment and in these cases, augmentation urethroplasty will be necessary despite the aforementioned concerns. A systematic review reported a pooled patency rate of 80% with no significant differences between type of urethroplasty (EPA versus augmentation urethroplasty). Stress UI was reported in 19% of cases [421]. Rourke et al., reported no significant differences between EPA and augmentation urethroplasty regarding de novo UI (26 vs. 25%; p=1), new onset ED (35 vs. 0%; p=0.06) or other adverse events (30% vs. 33%; p=1) [422]. 6.3.5.1.3.3.2.Prostatic strictures secondary to radiation/high energy sources Radiotherapy and high-energy modalities (cryoablation, HIFU) might provoke prostatic necrosis, sloughing and obstruction [100]. Cases refractory to TUR and with good bladder capacity might be salvaged by prostatectomy taking into account the morbidity associated with salvage RP (rectal injury, VUAS, incontinence) [100,423]. Mundy et al., treated nine patients with patency in six, (67%) and one (11%) needing an AUS for severe incontinence [410]. Cases with impaired bladder function, urethral necrosis and/or peri-urethral pathology should be considered for supravesical diversion, especially if a suprapubic catheter is not tolerated due to bladder pain or spasms [386,407,410,415]. Recently, a “pull-through” procedure has been reported as an alternative to cutaneous diversion for reconstruction of the devastated posterior urethra associated with a defunctionalised bladder after radiation where tissue vascularity and quality is poor [424]. This novel technique of total LUT reconstruction combines salvage cystectomy, ileal neobladder formation and urethral pull-through. An AUS was implanted in a second stage. All eight patients maintained a patent posterior urethra after a median follow-up of 58 (range 16-84) months. Five patients experienced low-grade complications after the first stage, but no high-grade complications were reported. Four out of eight (50%) patients experienced cuff erosion with need for removal and subsequent reimplantation. After a median of two revision surgeries (range 0 to 4), all patients achieved social continence enhancing QoL [424]. This technique requires further validation before its use can be recommended. Summary of evidenceLEPatency rates of urethroplasty for radiation-induced BMS is 80% with no significant differences between EPA and augmentation urethroplasty.3Radiation-induced BMS longer than 2-2.5 cm are rarely amenable for EPA.3De novo incontinence and new onset ED after urethral surgery for radiation-induced BMS are reported in respectively 19-26% and 0-35% of cases.3Salvage prostatectomy can achieve patency in 67% of patients for prostatic strictures after irradiation or high-energy treatments but morbidity is substantial.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingUse either excision and primary anastomosis (EPA) or augmentation urethroplasty for short (< 2.5 cm) radiation-induced bulbomembranous strictures (BMS) refractory to endoscopic treatment depending on surgeon’s experience.WeakPerform augmentation urethroplasty for long (> 2.5 cm) radiation-induced BMS.WeakWarn patients about the risk of de novo incontinence and new onset erectile dysfunction after urethroplasty for radiation-induced BMS.StrongOffer salvage prostatectomy in motivated and fit patients with adequate bladder function in case of a prostatic stricture due to irradiation or high-energy treatment.Weak 