5.1. Primary diagnosis. 5.1.1. Symptoms Painless visible haematuria is the most common presenting complaint. Other presenting symptoms and clinical signs include nonvisible haematuria, urgency, dysuria, increased frequency, and in more advanced tumours, pelvic pain and symptoms related to urinary tract obstruction. 5.1.2. Physical examination Physical examination should include rectal and vaginal bimanual palpation. A palpable pelvic mass can be found in patients with locally-advanced tumours. In addition, bimanual examination under anaesthesia should be carried out before and after TUR of the bladder tumour (TURBT) to assess whether there is a palpable mass or if the tumour is fixed to the pelvic wall [89,90]. However, considering the discrepancy between bimanual examination and pT stage after cystectomy (11% clinical overstaging and 31% clinical understaging), bimanual examination findings need to be interpreted with caution [91]. 5.1.3. Bladder imaging Patients with a bladder mass identified by any diagnostic imaging technique should undergo cystoscopy, biopsy and/or resection for histopathological diagnosis and staging. Due to the high specificity of diagnostic imaging for detecting BC, patients with imaging positive for BC may avoid diagnostic flexible cystoscopy and go directly to rigid cystoscopy and transurethral resection [92,93]. 5.1.4. Urinary cytology Examination of voided urine or bladder washings for exfoliated cancer cells has high sensitivity in high-grade tumours and is a useful indicator in cases of high-grade malignancy or CIS. However, positive urinary cytology may originate from an urothelial tumour located anywhere in the urinary tract. Evaluation of cytology specimens can be hampered by low cellular yield, UTIs, stones or intravesical instillations, but for experienced readers, specificity exceeds 90% [94,95]. However, negative cytology does not exclude a tumour. There is no known urinary marker specific for the diagnosis of invasive BC [96]. A standardised reporting system, the ‘Paris System’ redefining urinary cytology diagnostic categories has been updated in 2022 [97]: adequacy of urine specimens (Adequacy);negative for high-grade UC (Negative);atypical urothelial cells (AUC);suspicious for high-grade UC (Suspicious);high-grade UC (HGUC). 5.1.5. Cystoscopy Ultimately, the diagnosis of BC is made by cystoscopy and histological evaluation of resected tissue. An (outpatient) flexible cystoscopy is recommended to obtain a complete image of the bladder. However, in daily practice, If a bladder tumour has been visualised unequivocally by imaging studies such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or ultrasound (US), diagnostic cystoscopy may be omitted and the patient can proceed directly to TURB for histological diagnosis and resection. During the procedure, a thorough inspection of the bladder with rigid cystoscopy under anaesthesia is mandatory in order not to miss any tumours at the level of the bladder neck. A careful description of the cystoscopic findings is necessary. This should include documentation of the site, size, number, and appearance (papillary or solid) of the tumours, as well as a description of any mucosal abnormalities [98]. The use of a bladder diagram is recommended. The use of PDD could be considered if a T1 high-grade tumour is present and to identify associated CIS. Presence of CIS may lead to a modified treatment plan (see EAU Guidelines on Non-muscle-invasive Bladder Cancer [2]). Photodynamic diagnosis is highly sensitive for the detection of CIS and in experienced hands the rate of false-positive results may be similar to that with regular white-light cystoscopy [85,99]. 5.1.6. Transurethral resection of invasive bladder tumours The goal of TURB is to enable histopathological diagnosis and staging, which requires the inclusion of bladder muscle in the resection specimen. In case MIBC is suspected, tumours need to be (ideally) resected separately in parts, which include the exophytic part of the tumour, the underlying bladder wall with the detrusor muscle, and the edges of the resection area. At least the deeper part of the resection specimen must be referred to the pathologist in a separate labelled container to enable making a correct diagnosis and staging. In cases in which RT is considered and CIS is to be excluded, PDD can be used [100]. The involvement of the prostatic urethra and ducts in men with bladder tumours has been reported in up to 1 in 3 patients [58,101,102]. Under-reporting possibly also means that the exact risk is not known, but it seems to be higher if the tumour is located on the trigone or bladder neck, with concomitant bladder CIS, and in the case of multiple tumours [56,103,104]. Involvement of the prostatic urethra can be determined either at the time of primary TURB or by frozen section during the cystoprostatectomy procedure. A frozen section has a higher negative-predictive value and is more accurate [105-107]. A negative urethral frozen section can reliably identify patients in whom urethrectomy should be avoided. However, a positive pre-operative biopsy seems to have limited utility as these findings are not reliably associated with final margin status [105,108]. Diagnosis of a urethral tumour before cystectomy will result in a urethrectomy which could be a contraindication for an orthotopic diversion. However, an orthotopic diversion should not be denied based on positive pre-operative biopsy findings alone and frozen section should be part of the RC procedure, particularly in male patients [109,110]. 5.1.7. Summary of evidence and guidelines for the primary assessment of presumably invasive bladder tumours Summary of evidenceLECystoscopy is necessary for the diagnosis of bladder cancer.1Urinary cytology has high sensitivity in high-grade tumours including carcinoma in situ.2bIn men, prostatic urethral biopsy includes resection from the bladder neck to the verumontanum (between the 5 and 7 o’clock position) using a resection loop. In case any abnormal-looking areas in the prostatic urethra are present at this time, these need to be biopsied as well.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingDescribe all macroscopic features of the tumour (site, size, number and appearance) and mucosal abnormalities during cystoscopy. Use a bladder diagram.StrongTake a biopsy of the prostatic urethra in cases of bladder neck tumour, when bladder carcinoma in situ is present or suspected, when there is positive cytology without evidence of tumour in the bladder, or when abnormalities of the prostatic urethra are visible.StrongIn men with a negative prostatic urethral biopsy undergoing subsequent orthotopic neobladder construction, an intra-operative frozen section can be omitted.StrongIn men with a prior positive transurethral prostatic biopsy, subsequent orthotopic neobladder construction should not be denied a priori, unless an intra-operative frozen section of the distal urethral stump reveals malignancy at the level of urethral dissection.StrongIn women undergoing subsequent orthotopic neobladder construction, obtain procedural information (including histological evaluation) of the bladder neck and urethral margin, either prior to, or at the time of cystectomy.StrongIn the pathology report, specify the grade, depth of tumour invasion, and whether the lamina propria and muscle tissue are present in the specimen.Strong (For general information on the assessment of bladder tumours, see EAU Guidelines on Non-muscle-invasive Bladder Cancer ).[2] 5.1.8. EAU-ESMO consensus statements on the management of advanced- and variant bladder cancer [81-82]* Consensus statementDifferentiating between urachal and non-urachal subtypes of adenocarcinoma is essential when making treatment decisions. *Only statements which met the a priori consensus threshold across all three stakeholder groups are listed(defined as ≥ 70% agreement and ≤ 15% disagreement, or vice versa). 