5.2. Imaging for staging of MIBC. In clinical practice, tumour stage and histopathological grade are used to guide treatment and determine prognosis [111-113]. Imaging is essential for local- and distant staging of BC. The goal of imaging patients with BC is to: Detect bladder tumours;Differentiate T1 from T2 tumours as their treatment will differ;Determine presence of any obstruction to the upper UT;Evaluate the extent of locally-advanced tumour stage or tumour spread to LNs;Assess synchronous tumour in the upper UT or other distant organs (e.g., liver, lungs, bones, peritoneum, pleura, and adrenal glands). Table 5.1: The role of imaging in treatment planning GoalImaging modalityDifferentiate T1 from T2 tumoursMRI using the Vesical Imaging Reporting and Data System [VI-RADS] scoreEvaluate locally-advanced stage or spread to LNsCT scan and MRI for abdominal- and pelvic LNs or PET/CT scanAssess UUT or other distant organsCT urography for evaluating the UUT and PET/CT to detect distant organ metastasis 5.2.1. Detection Imaging modalities used to detect bladder tumours are: US, CT and MRI-scan. Bladder tumours are often detected as part of the haematuria work-up (including cystoscopy) or as an incidental finding on imaging. Ultrasound can visualise intraluminal masses in the bladder and additional signs such as hydronephrosis, but cannot rule out all possible causes of haematuria. According to the results of the DETECT I trial, CT urogram can be safely replaced by renal and bladder US in patients who have non-visible haematuria [114]. 5.2.2. Local staging of the bladder and upper tract 5.2.2.1. Magnetic resonance imaging for local staging of MIBC Differentiation between NMIBC and MIBC is crucial for BC treatment. Magnetic resonance imaging has superior soft tissue contrast resolution compared with CT and can evaluate post-biopsy reaction as enhancement of the tumour occurs earlier than that of the normal bladder wall due to neovascularisation [115,116]. The accuracy of MRI for primary tumour staging ranges from 73% to 96% (mean 85%). Huang et al., in a systematic review, showed a pooled sensitivity and specificity of 90% and 88%, respectively, with results increasing to 92% and 96% when a 3T scan was used, with diffusion-weighted (DW) MRI as part of the acquisition protocol [117]. A systematic review evaluating 20 studies (n = 1,724), showed a pooled sensitivity and specificity of MRI for differentiating between stages ≤ T1 and ≥ T2 of 0.92 (95% CI: 0.88–0.95) and 0.88 (95% CI: 0.78–0.94), respectively [118]. More recently, multiparametric (mp) MRI using the VI-RADS scoring system has been introduced to differentiate between T1 vs. T2 bladder tumours with a high diagnostic accuracy [119]. The VI-RADS offers a standardised approach to both acquisition and reporting of mpMRI for BC; however, the best practice of using mpMRI in this setting and the exact cut-off levels for VI-RADS scoring still need to be determined [116]. To date, the VI-RADS score has been validated by several research groups, showing good diagnostic performance in detecting MIBC [120,121]. Also, a high diagnostic performance for the detection of muscle invasion of urothelial carcinoma subtypes was found [122]. VI-RADS assessment scoring proved to be an independent predictor of muscle-invasiveness, which might facilitate a shift toward a more aggressive approach to selection of patients at high risk of MIBC, according to a novel proposed predictive pathway [123]. A meta-analysis found that the pooled sensitivity and specificity of mpMRI with VI-RADS acquisition and scoring for predicting MIBC were 83% and 90%, respectively [124]. The diagnostic performance of using VI-RADS scoring is similar to the diagnostic performance of a conventional bladder MRI in determining MIBC based on a previous meta-analysis of 24 studies [124]. The analysis found substantial inter-reader agreement, with kappa (κ) values ranging from 0.81 to 0.92 [124]. A systematic review and meta-analysis (n = 1,016) showed a pooled weighted mean κ estimate of 0.83 (95% CI: 0.78–0.88) [125]. The potential role of mpMRI as first-line test for local staging of BC rather than TURB has been demonstrated in a recent clinical trial [126]. A modified Delphi methodology was recently developed by a panel of highly experienced, internationally recognised radiologists, urologists, oncologists, radiation oncologists and a representative from a patient advocacy group, to provide consensus-based recommendations for urinary bladder MRI to help formulate international guidelines, particularly for pre-operative cancer staging and the assessment of the response to systemic therapy. Among several statements that reached agreement, experts recommend acquiring and interpreting MR images according to VI-RADS recommendations and always perform MRI before TURBT, if available [127]. Considering the link established between the use of gadolinium-based contrast agents and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) in patients with impaired renal function, contrast medium should be managed according to the European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR) Guidelines [128]. Interest is growing in the role of non-contrast MRI for the assessment of MIBC using VI-RADS with studies demonstrating how non-contrast-enhanced VI-RADS scoring achieved similar predictive accuracy for diagnosis of MIBC to that of conventional VI-RADS; however, further additional evidence is needed to provide any recommendation on the use of non-contrast MRI for bladder cancer staging [129]. 5.2.2.2. CT imaging for local staging of MIBC General advantages of CT imaging include high spatial resolution, shorter acquisition time, wider coverage in a single breath hold, and lower susceptibility to variable patient factors. Computed tomography is unable to differentiate between stages Ta to T3a tumours, but it is useful for detecting invasion into the perivesical fat (T3b) and adjacent organs. The accuracy of CT in determining extravesical tumour extension increases with more advanced disease [130]. Both CT and MRI may be used for assessment of local invasion by T3b disease, or higher, but they are unable to accurately diagnose microscopic invasion of perivesical fat (T2 vs. T3a) [131]. Contrast-enhanced CT using iodinated contrast media can be considered as an alternative to MRI when MRI is contraindicated or not available [128]. 5.2.2.3. Computed tomography urography for local staging of the upper tract For local staging of the UUT, CTU has the highest diagnostic accuracy of the available imaging techniques. The sensitivity of CTU for UTUC is 0.67–1.0 and specificity is 0.93–0.99 [132]. Rapid acquisition of thin sections allows high-resolution isotropic images that can be viewed in multiple planes to assist with diagnosis without loss of resolution. Epithelial ‘flat lesions’ without mass effect or urothelial thickening are generally not visible with CT. The secondary sign of hydronephrosis is associated with advanced disease and poor oncological outcome [133]. The presence of enlarged LNs is highly predictive of metastases in UTUC [134]. 5.2.2.4. Magnetic resonance urography for local staging of the upper tract Magnetic resonance urography is indicated in patients who cannot undergo CTU, usually when radiation or iodinated contrast media are contraindicated [135]. The sensitivity of MR-urography is 0.75 after contrast injection for tumours < 2 cm [135]. The use of MR-urography with gadolinium-based contrast media should be limited in patients with severe renal impairment (< 30 mL/min creatinine clearance), due to the risk of NSF. Computed tomography urography is generally preferred to MR-urography for diagnosing and staging UTUC. 5.2.3. Distant staging of lymph nodes and other sites 5.2.3.1. Imaging of lymph nodes in MIBC Assessment of LN metastases based on size alone is limited; both CT and MRI are unable to identify metastases in normal-sized or minimally-enlarged nodes. The sensitivity of these modalities for detection of LN metastases is low (48–87%). Specificity is also low because nodal enlargement may be due to benign disease. Overall, CT and MRI show similar results in the detection of LN metastases in a variety of primary pelvic tumours [135-137]. Pelvic nodes > 8 mm and abdominal nodes > 10 mm in maximum short-axis diameter, detected by CT or MRI, should be regarded as pathologically enlarged [138]. In a recent paper including 1,104 patients, conventional cross-sectional imaging showed slight concordance (64.9%) between cN and pN stages (sensitivity: 30%; specificity: 84%) [139]. An artificial intelligence-assisted lymph node metastases diagnostic model (LNMDM) on whole slide images (CT, MRI and PET/CT) has been developed and applied in a cohort of 1,012 patients with bladder cancer who had radical cystectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection with the AUC for accurate diagnosis of the LNMDM ranged from 0.978 (95% CI 0.960–0.996) to 0.998 (95% CI: 0.996–1.000) in the five validation sets [140]. 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose-Positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) combined with CT is increasingly being used in clinical practice but its exact role still needs to be further evaluated [141,142]. According to a systematic review and meta-analysis including 785 patients, FDG-PET/CT showed a low sensitivity and high specificity for the detection of metastatic LNs in patients with newly diagnosed BC [143]. However, most studies evaluating FDG-PET/CT for LN assessment reported higher sensitivity than CT, with comparable specificity [144]. PET/CT can provide additional information to guide local treatment in case of presence of pelvic nodes metastases [145]. However, in a clinical trial assessing the role of PET/CT in evaluating LN involvement in patients receiving neoadjuvant pembrolizumab. The performance of PET/CT did not justify its routine use in cN0 MIBC patients, but proved useful in optimising selection of MIBC patients suited for neoadjuvant immunotherapy (IO) strategies in a clinical trial setting [146]. Several studies have demonstrated the possible role of radiomics for the detection of pathological lymph nodes in bladder cancer patients; however, the level of evidence remains low. 5.2.3.2. Distant metastases Prior to any curative treatment, it is essential to evaluate the presence of distant metastases. Computed tomography and MRI are the diagnostic techniques of choice to detect e.g., lung [147] and liver metastases [148], respectively. Evidence for the role of FDG-PET/CT for staging distant metastases of MIBC is still limited. In a recent series of 711 patients, FDG-PET/CT has shown to provide important staging information through the detection of distant metastases, which may impact the clinical management of MIBC patients [145]. Bone and brain metastases are rare at the time of presentation of invasive BC. In a recent retrospective, large sample, study bone scan has been shown to have an impact on patients’ intended management in only 19 out of 1,148 (1.7%) patients, therefore it should not be routinely used [149]. Whole- body MRI is more sensitive and specific for diagnosing bone metastases than bone scintigraphy [150]. Also, additional brain imaging is not routinely indicated unless the patient has specific symptoms or signs to suggest brain metastases. 5.2.4. Response to therapy Pre-operative MRI conducted in various clinical settings may provide useful information regarding treatment response. In the neoadjuvant setting, the first study evaluating the performance of MRI in assessing therapeutic response to chemotherapy showed superiority of DWI over T2-weighted and dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)-MRI [151]. The high specificity of DWI indicates its usefulness in accurate predicting a complete histopathological response, allowing for better patient selection for bladder-sparing protocols [152]. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging may also be useful for predicting a patient’s response to chemotherapy. In addition, quantitative DWI/MRI analysis has shown to provide an accurate and non-invasive assessment of bladder RT response. However, multicentre validation is required before prospective testing to inform MIBC follow-up schedules and decision making [153]. In the previously cited consensus-based recommendations, experts agreed upon the performance on MRI to assess response to systemic therapy to select patients for radical treatment, for surveillance, and for bladder-sparing surgery [127]. A meta-analysis investigated the predictive role of 18F-FDG PET/CT for assessment of tumour response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in a total of 278 patients, showed a pooled sensitivity of 0.84 (95% CI, 0.72–0.91), and specificity of 0.75 (95% CI, 0.59–0.86). Among the five studies, only three used both of CR and pCR as reference standard [154]. The performance of PET/CT in evaluating LN involvement in patients receiving neoadjuvant pembrolizumab did not justify its routine use in cN0 MIBC patients [146]. 5.2.5. Future perspectives Potential future application of the VI-RADS score may include prediction of response to treatment as well as peri-operative outcomes using its modified version: the NAC VI-RADS (nacVI-RADS), however, prospective evidence is warranted [155]. Future trends might include image analysis radiomic-based techniques in predicting MIBC. A meta- analysis (n = 860) provided summary estimates for sensitivity and specificity in predicting MIBC of 82% (95% CI: 77–86%) and 81% (95% CI: 76–85%), respectively [156]. PET/MRI combining the benefits of MRI with functional imaging could be evisioned for the detection of metastatic BC lesions not seen on CT in patients who cannot receive intravenous iodine contrast, and may lead to improved treatment planning and monitoring for BC [157]. Among the novel approaches and radiotracers, in a pilot study, Rietbergen et al., showed that the sentinel node (SN) biopsy in bladder cancer using the hybrid tracer ICG- 99mTc-nanocolloid is feasible, and in patients with a successful pre-operative SN mapping using lymphoscintigraphy and SPECT/CT, the intraoperative SN guidance and detection are effective, even outside the extended pelvic lymph node dissection (ePLND) area [158]. 5.2.6. Summary of evidence and guidelines for staging in muscle-invasive bladder cancer Summary of evidenceLEImaging as part of staging in muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) provides information about prognosis and assists in selection of the most appropriate treatment.2bThe diagnosis of upper tract UC depends on CT urography and, if needed, ureteroscopy.2bIn local staging, MRI is superior to CT in terms of differentiating T1 from T2 disease.2bMRI is accurate for the assessment of tumour response to systemic therapy3Bone scintigraphy has limited value in the staging of invasive BC.3FDG-PET/CT can provide additional information to guide treatment.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingAlways perform MRI before TURBT, if available.WeakIn patients with confirmed muscle-invasive bladder cancer, use computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis for staging, including some form of CT urography with designated phases for optimal urothelial evaluation.StrongUse CT urography, unless it is contraindicated for reasons related to contrast adminstration or radiation dose; in that case use magnetic resonance imaging.StrongOffer MRI to assess the response to systemic therapy, which aids in the selection of patients for radical treatment, surveillance, and bladder-sparing surgery.Weak 