3.5.6. Hereditary kidney tumours. Five to eight percent of RCCs are hereditary; to date there are ten hereditary RCC syndromes associated with specific germline mutations, RCC histology, and comorbidities. Hereditary RCC syndromes are often suggested by family history, age of onset and presence of other lesions typical for the respective syndromes. Median age for hereditary RCC is 37 years; 70% of hereditary RCC tumours are found in the lowest decile (age 46 years or younger) of all RCC tumours [46]. Hereditary kidney tumours are found in the following entities: VHL syndrome; hereditary pRCC; Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome; Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC (FHD-RCC), previously called hereditary leiomyomatosis and RCC (HLRCC); tuberous sclerosis; germline succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) mutation; non-polyposis colorectal cancer syndrome; hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumour syndrome; phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) hamartoma syndrome (PHTS); constitutional chromosome 3 translocation; familial non-syndromic ccRCC and BAP1-associated RCC [47]. Renal medullary carcinoma can be included because of its association with hereditary haemoglobinopathies [48-51]. Patients with hereditary kidney cancer syndromes may require repeated surgical intervention [52,53]. In most hereditary RCCs nephron-sparing approaches are recommended. The exceptions are FHD-RCC and SDH syndromes for which immediate surgical intervention is recommended due to the aggressive nature of these tumours. For other hereditary syndromes such as VHL, surveillance is recommended until the largest tumour reaches 3 cm in diameter; this to limit the number of repeat interventions [54,55]. Active surveillance for VHL, SDH and FHD-RCC should, in individual patients, follow the size, growth rate and location of the tumours, rather than applying a standardised follow-up interval. Regular screening for both renal and extra-renal lesions should follow international guidelines for these syndromes [55]. Multidisciplinary and co-ordinated care should be offered, where appropriate [56]. In FHD-RCC, renal screening in relatives has shown benefit in detecting early-stage RCCs [57], with HLRCCs appearing to have unique molecular profiles. Although not hereditary, somatic fusion translocations of TFE3 and TFEB may affect 15% of patients with RCC younger than 45 years and 20-45% of children and young adults diagnosed with RCC [58]. A phase II trial demonstrated clinical activity of an oral HIF-2α (hypoxia-inducible factor) inhibitor MK-6482 (belzutifan) in VHL patients [59]. Additional information on treatment of VHL can be found in Section 7.4.4. 