8.3. Overall quality of life in men with PCa. Living longer with PCa does not necessarily equate to living well [1342,1344]. There is clear evidence of unmet needs and ongoing support requirements for some individuals and partners after diagnosis and treatment for PCa [1424,1425]. Fear of cancer recurrence and PSA anxiety has a prevalence of 16% and 22%, respectively, across studies [1426]. Combined cognitive- and education-based psychological interventions improve depression, anxiety, and distress [1427]. Cancer impacts on the wider family and cognitive behavioural therapy can help reduce depression, anxiety, and stress in caregivers [1428]. Radical treatment for PCa can negatively impact long-term QoL (e.g., sexual, urinary and bowel dysfunction) as can ADT used in short- or long-term treatment, e.g., sexual problems, fatigue, psychological morbidity, adverse metabolic sequelae and increased cardiovascular and bone fracture risk [1370,1429]. Direct symptoms from advanced or metastatic cancer, e.g., pain, hypercalcaemia, spinal cord compression and pathological fractures, also adversely affect health [1430,1431]. Patients’ QoL including domains such as sexual function, urinary function and bowel function is worse after treatment for PCa compared to non-cancer controls [1432,1433]. A PCa diagnosis commonly results in financial strain both for the individual and their families. This financial toxicity is associated with younger age at diagnosis, black race, low socio-economic status, low educational attainment and living in a rural area. Clinicians should discuss financial strains and signpost to support services so that quality of life and adherence to treatment can be maintained [1434]. As QoL is subjective and can mean different things to different people it can be difficult to measure and compare. Nevertheless, there are some generally common features across virtually all patients. Drawing from these common features, specific tools or PROMs have been developed and validated for men with PCa. These questionnaires assess common issues after PCa diagnosis and treatment and generate scores which reflect the impact on perceptions of HRQoL. During the process of undertaking two dedicated SRs around cancer-specific QoL outcomes in patients with PCa as the foundation for our guideline recommendations, the following validated PROMs were found in our searches (see Table 8.3.1). The tools with the best evidence for psychometric properties and feasibility for use in routine practice and research settings to assess PROMs in patients with localised PCa were EORTC QLQ-C30 and QLQ-PR25. Since EORTC QLQ-C30 is a general module that does not directly assess PCa-specific issues, it should be adopted in conjunction with the QLQ-PR25 module [1435]. Table 8.3.1: PROMs assessing cancer specific quality of life [1435] QuestionnaireDomains/itemsEuropean Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-C30 (EORTC QLQ-C30) [1436]Five functional scales (physical, role, cognitive, emotional, and social); three symptom scales (fatigue, pain, and nausea and vomiting); global health status/QoL scale; and a number of single items assessing additional symptoms commonly reported by cancer patients (dyspnoea, loss of appetite, insomnia, constipation and diarrhoea) and perceived financial impact of the disease.European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-PR 25 (EORTC QLQ-PR 25) [1437]Urinary, bowel and treatment-related symptoms, as well as sexual activity and sexual function.Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-General (FACT-G) [1438]Physical well-being, social/family well-being, emotional well-being, and functional well-being.Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Prostate (FACT-P) [1439]12 cancer site specific items to assess for prostate-related symptoms. Can be combined with FACT-G or reported separately.Expanded prostate cancer index composite (EPIC) [1440]Urinary, bowel, sexual, and hormonal symptoms.Expanded prostate cancer index composite short form 26 (EPIC 26) [1441]Urinary, sexual, bowel, and hormonal domains.UCLA Prostate Cancer Index (UCLA PCI) [1442]Urinary, bowel, and sexual domains.Prostate Cancer Quality of Life Instrument (PCQoL) [1443]Urinary, sexual, and bowel domains, supplemented by a scale assessing anxiety.Prostate Cancer Outcome Study Instrument [1433]Urinary, bowel, and sexual domains. 