5.1. Conservative treatment. 5.1.1. Watchful waiting Many men with LUTS are not troubled enough by their symptoms to need drug treatment or surgical intervention. All men with LUTS should be formally assessed prior to any allocation of treatment in order to establish symptom severity and to differentiate between men with uncomplicated (the majority) and complicated LUTS. Watchful waiting is a viable option for many men with non-bothersome LUTS as few will progress to AUR and complications (e.g. renal insufficiency or stones) [145,146], whilst others can remain stable for years [147]. In one study, approximately 85% of men with mild LUTS were stable on WW at one year [148]. A study comparing WW and transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) in men with moderate LUTS showed the surgical group had improved bladder function (flow rates and PVR volumes), especially in those with high levels of bother; 36% of WW patients crossed over to surgery within five years, leaving 64% doing well in the WW group [149,150]. Increasing symptom bother and PVR volumes are the strongest predictors of WW failure. Men with mild-to-moderate uncomplicated LUTS who are not too troubled by their symptoms are suitable for WW. 5.1.2. Behavioural and dietary modifications It is customary for this type of management to include the following components: education (about the patient’s condition);reassurance (that cancer is not a cause of the urinary symptoms);periodic monitoring;lifestyle advice [147,148,151,152] such as:reduction of fluid intake at specific times aimed at reducing urinary frequency when most inconvenient (e.g., at night or when going out in public);avoidance/moderation of intake of caffeine or alcohol, which may have a diuretic and irritant effect, thereby increasing fluid output and enhancing frequency, urgency and nocturia;use of relaxed and double-voiding techniques;urethral milking to prevent post-micturition dribble;distraction techniques such as penile squeeze, breathing exercises, perineal pressure, and mental tricks to take the mind off the bladder and toilet, to help control OAB symptoms;bladder retraining that encourages men to hold on when they have urgency to increase their bladder capacity and the time between voids;reviewing the medication and optimising the time of administration or substituting drugs for others that have fewer urinary effects (these recommendations apply especially to diuretics);providing necessary assistance when there is impairment of dexterity, mobility, or mental state;treatment of constipation. Evidence exists that self-management as part of WW reduces both symptoms and progression [151,152]. Men randomised to three self-care management sessions in addition to standard care had better symptom improvement and QoL than men treated with standard care only, for up to a year [151]. A SR and meta-analysis found reasonable certainty in estimates that self-management intervention significantly reduced symptom severity in terms of IPSS at six months compared with usual care [153]. The reduction in IPSS score with self-management was similar to that achieved with drug therapy at six to twelve weeks. Self-management had a smaller, additional benefit at six weeks when added to drug therapy [153]. 5.1.3. Practical considerations The components of self-care management have not been individually studied. The above components of lifestyle advice have been derived from formal consensus methodology [154]. Further research in this area is required. Summary of evidenceLEWatchful waiting is usually a safe alternative for men who are less bothered by urinary difficulty or who wish to delay treatment. The treatment failure rate over a period of five years was 21%; 79% of patients were clinically stable.1bAn additional study reported 81% of patients were clinically stable on WW after a mean follow-up of seventeen months.2Men randomised to three self-management sessions in addition to standard care had better symptom improvement and QoL than men treated with standard care alone at up to a year. Self-care management as part of WW reduces both symptoms and progression.1bSelf-management achieved a clinically meaningful reduction in symptom severity at six months compared to usual care. There was also a small but significant additional benefit of adding self-management to drug therapy.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer men with mild/moderate symptoms, minimally bothered by their symptoms, watchful waiting.StrongOffer men with LUTS lifestyle advice and self-care information prior to, or concurrent with, treatment.Strong 