5.2.4. Beta-3 agonist. Mechanism of action: Beta-3 adrenoceptors are the predominant beta receptors expressed in the smooth muscle cells of the detrusor and their stimulation is thought to induce detrusor relaxation. The mode of action of beta-3 agonists is not fully elucidated [227]. Efficacy: Mirabegron 50 mg is the first clinically available beta-3 agonist with approval for use in adults with OAB. Mirabegron has undergone extensive evaluation in RCTs conducted in Europe, Australia, North America, and Japan [228-232]. Mirabegron demonstrated significant efficacy in treating the symptoms of OAB, including micturition frequency, urgency and UUI and also patient perception of treatment benefit. These studies had a predominantly female study population. A meta-analysis of eight RCTs including 10,248 patients (27% male) found that mirabegron treatment resulted in reduced frequency, urgency and UUI rates, as well as an improved voided volume with a statistically significant improvement of nocturia compared with both placebo and tolterodine [233]. Mirabegron has been evaluated in male patients with OAB in the context of LUTS either associated or not associated with BPO confirmed by urodynamics [234]. Mirabegron 25 mg daily led to increased satisfaction and improved QoL, but symptoms assessed by validated questionnaires (IPSS and OAB-SS), only improved in non-obstructed patients. Mirabegron as an add-on therapy has been studied in OAB patients with incontinence despite antimuscarinic therapy [235], again in a predominantly female study population. An Asian study with a higher proportion of male subjects (approximately one third) reported superiority over placebo in reducing frequency of micturition but did not report the results separately for the genders [236]. In a study of more than 1,000 patients of whom approximately 30% were male, combination therapy of mirabegron 25/50 mg and solifenacin 5/10 mg was associated with statistically significant improvements in patient outcomes and health related QoL vs. solifenacin 5 mg and placebo; however, they did not separate out the effects in men and women [237]. In another study, in which 28% patients were male, mirabegron significantly improved patient reported perception of their condition and QoL whether or not patients were incontinent [238]. A phase IV study, with a small proportion of male subjects, reported addition of mirabegron in people with persisting urgency despite solifenacin in a Japanese population [239]. An RCT has suggested Mirabegron might lead to improvement of urinary symptoms and sexual function in patients suffering from BPO and concurrent erectile dysfunction [240]. The study showed a significant improvement in the IIEF-15 total score and IPSS score in patients treated with Mirabegron + Doxazosin [240]. Nevertheless, further multicentre RCTs with large numbers of patients are required to consolidate these data. Tolerability and safety: The most common treatment-related adverse events in the mirabegron groups were hypertension, UTI, headache and nasopharyngitis [228-231]. Mirabegron is contraindicated in patients with severe uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood pressure ≥ 180 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 110 mmHg, or both). Blood pressure should be measured before starting treatment and monitored regularly during treatment. A combination of thirteen clinical studies including 13,396 patients, 25% of whom were male, showed that OAB treatments (anticholinergics or mirabegron) were not associated with an increased risk of hypertension or cardiovascular events compared to placebo [241]. The proportion of patients with dry mouth and constipation in the mirabegron groups was notably lower than reported in RCTs of other OAB agents or of the active control tolterodine [228]. Evaluation of urodynamic parameters in men with combined BOO and OAB concluded that mirabegron did not adversely affect voiding urodynamic parameters compared to placebo in terms of Qmax, detrusor pressure at maximum flow and BCI [242]. The overall change in PVR with mirabegron is small [242]. A small prospective study (mainly focused on males) has shown that mirabegron 25 mg is safe in patients aged 80 years or more with multiple co-morbidities [243]. A pooled analysis of three trials, each of twelve weeks and a one-year trial showed, in patients aged > 65 years, a more favourable tolerability profile for mirabegron than antimuscarinics [244]. The PILLAR phase IV study also showed that in a large population of 888 patients ≥ 65 years (approx. 30% of males), mirabegron 50 mg was safe and effective [245]. In an eighteen-week study of 3,527 patients (23% male), the incidence of adverse events was higher in the combination (solifenacin 5 mg plus mirabegron 25 mg) group (40%) than the mirabegron 25 mg alone group (32%). Events recorded as urinary retention were low (< 1%) but were reported slightly more frequently in the combined group when compared with the monotherapy and placebo groups. The PVR volume was slightly increased in the combined group compared with solifenacin 5 mg, and the mirabegron monotherapy and placebo groups. Combined therapy with solifenacin 5 mg plus mirabegron 25 mg and solifenacin 5 mg plus mirabegron 50 mg provided improvements in efficacy generally consistent with an additive effect [246]. In a retrospective analysis of persistence and adherence in 21,996 patients, of whom 30% were male, the median time to discontinuation was significantly longer for mirabegron (169 days) compared to tolterodine (56 days) and other antimuscarinics (30-78 days). There was no statistical difference between men and women [247]. The phase III EMPOWUR trial comparing vibegron to placebo and tolterodine showed once daily 75 mg vibegron provided statistically significant reductions in micturitions, urgency episodes and UUI [248]. Treatment was well tolerated with a favourable safety profile. However, the majority of the study population (85%) were female and vibegron is not yet licenced in Europe. Practical considerations: Long-term studies on the efficacy and safety of mirabegron in men of any age with LUTS are not yet available. Available studies on mirabegron in combination with antimuscarinics in OAB patients had a predominantly female study population, while further trials are still pending. Summary of evidenceLEMirabegron improves storage LUTS, including urinary frequency, urgency and UUI.2Patients prescribed mirabegron remained on treatment longer than those prescribed antimuscarinics.3 RecommendationStrength ratingUse beta-3 agonists in men with moderate-to-severe LUTS who mainly have bladder storage symptoms.Weak 