5.2.1. α1-Adrenoceptor antagonists (α1-blockers). Mechanism of action: α1-blockers aim to inhibit the effect of endogenously released noradrenaline on smooth muscle cells in the prostate and thereby reduce prostate tone and BOO [155]. However, α1-blockers have little effect on urodynamically determined bladder outlet resistance [156], and treatment-associated improvement of LUTS correlates poorly with obstruction [157]. Thus, other mechanisms of action may also be relevant. Alpha 1-adrenoceptors located outside the prostate (e.g. urinary bladder and/or spinal cord) and α1-adrenoceptor subtypes (α1B- or α1D-adrenoceptors) may play a role as mediators of effects. Alpha 1-adrenoceptors in blood vessels, other non-prostatic smooth muscle cells, and the central nervous system may mediate adverse events. Currently available α1-blockers are: alfuzosin hydrochloride (alfuzosin); doxazosin mesylate (doxazosin); silodosin; tamsulosin hydrochloride (tamsulosin); terazosin hydrochloride (terazosin); and naftopidil. Alpha 1-blockers exist in different formulations. Although different formulations result in different pharmacokinetic and tolerability profiles, the overall difference in clinical efficacy between the difference formulations seems negligible. Efficacy: Indirect comparisons and limited direct comparisons between α1-blockers demonstrate that all α1-blockers have a similar efficacy in appropriate doses [158]. Clinical effects take a few weeks to develop fully, but significant efficacy over placebo can occur within hours to days [157]. Controlled studies show that α1-blockers typically reduce IPSS by approximately 30-40% and increase Qmax by approximately 20-25%. However, substantial improvements also occurred in the corresponding placebo arms [63,159]. In open-label studies, an IPSS improvement of up to 50% and Qmax increase of up to 40% were documented [63,159]. A SR and meta-analysis suggested that Qmax variation underestimates the real effect of α1-blockers on BPO, as small improvements in Qmax correspond to relevant improvements in BOO index in PFS [160]. Alpha 1-blockers can reduce both storage and voiding LUTS. Prostate size does not affect α1-blocker efficacy in studies with follow-up periods of less than one year, but α1-blockers do seem to be more efficacious in patients with smaller prostates (< 40 mL) in longer-term studies [65,161-164]. The efficacy of α1-blockers is similar across age groups [159]. A pooled analysis of phase III and IV trials of silodosin 8 mg demonstrated that improvements in total, storage, voiding, and QoL IPSS scores were similar for the severe and not severe LUTS cohorts [165]. In addition, α1-blockers neither reduce prostate size nor prevent AUR in long-term studies [162-164]; however, evidence suggests that the use of α1-blockers (alfuzosin, tamsulosin and silodosin) improve resolution of AUR [166,167]. Nonetheless, IPSS reduction and Qmax improvement during α1-blocker treatment appears to be maintained over at least four years. Tolerability and safety: Tissue distribution, subtype selectivity, and pharmacokinetic profiles of certain formulations may contribute to the tolerability profile of specific drugs. The most frequent adverse events of α1-blockers are asthenia, dizziness and (orthostatic) hypotension. Vasodilating effects are most pronounced with doxazosin and terazosin and are less common with alfuzosin and tamsulosin [168]. Patients with cardiovascular co-morbidity and/or vaso-active co-medication may be susceptible to α1-blocker-induced vasodilatation [169]. In contrast, the frequency of hypotension with the α1A-selective blocker silodosin is comparable with placebo [170]. In a large retrospective cohort analysis of men aged > 66 years treated with α1-blockers the risks of falling (odds ratio [OR] 1.14) and of sustaining a fracture (OR 1.16) was increased, most likely as a result of induced hypotension [171]. In terms of cardiovascular risk, a large population-based study reported an increased risk of cardiac failure with long-term α-blocker use (HR 1.22), which was higher for non-selective α-blockers [172]. Whilst there has been concern about a possible risk of dementia with long-term use of α1-blockers, a large Finnish nationwide case-control study of 24,602 cases and 98,397 controls did not find evidence of a significant association [173]. An adverse ocular event termed intra-operative floppy iris syndrome (IFIS) was reported in 2005, affecting cataract surgery [174]. A meta-analysis on IFIS after alfuzosin, doxazosin, tamsulosin or terazosin exposure showed an increased risk for all α1-blockers [175]. However, the OR for IFIS was much higher for tamsulosin. It appears prudent not to initiate α1-blocker treatment prior to scheduled cataract surgery, and the ophthalmologist should be informed about α1-blocker use. A SR concluded that α1-blockers do not adversely affect libido, or erectile function (ED), but can cause abnormal ejaculation (OR: 7.53) [176]. Originally, abnormal ejaculation was thought to be retrograde, but more recent data demonstrate that it is due to a decrease or absence of seminal fluid during ejaculation, with young age being an apparent risk factor. In a meta-analysis ejaculatory dysfunction (EjD) was significantly more common with α1-blockers than with placebo (OR: 5.88). In particular, EjD was significantly more commonly related with tamsulosin or silodosin (OR: 8.57 and 32.5) than placebo, while both doxazosin and terazosin (OR: 0.80 and 1.78) were associated with a low risk of EjD [177]. In the meta-regression, the occurrence of EjD was independently associated with the improvement of urinary symptoms and flow rate, suggesting that the more effective the α1-blocker is the greater the incidence of EjD. Practical considerations: α1-blockers are usually considered the first-line drug treatment for male LUTS because of their rapid onset of action, good efficacy, and low rate and severity of adverse events. However, α1-blockers do not prevent occurrence of urinary retention or need for surgery. Ophthalmologists should be informed about α1-blocker use prior to cataract surgery. Elderly patients treated with non-selective α1-blockers should be informed about the risk of orthostatic hypotension. Sexually active patients treated with selective α1-blockers should be counselled about the risk of EjD. Summary of evidenceLEAlpha 1-blockers are effective in reducing urinary symptoms (IPSS) and increasing the peak urinary flow rate (Qmax) compared with placebo.1aAlfuzosin, terazosin and doxazosin showed a statistically significant increased risk of developing vascular-related events compared with placebo.1aAlfuzosin, doxazosin, tamsulosin and terazosin exposure has been associated with an increased risk of IFIS.1aEjaculatory dysfunction is significantly more common with α1-blockers than with placebo, particularly with more selective α1-blockers such as tamsulosin and silodosin.1a RecommendationStrength ratingOffer α1-blockers to men with moderate-to-severe LUTS.Strong 