5.2.3. Muscarinic receptor antagonists. Mechanism of action: The detrusor is innervated by parasympathetic nerves whose main neurotransmitter is acetylcholine, which stimulates muscarinic receptors (M-cholinoreceptors) on the smooth muscle cells. Muscarinic receptors are also present on other cell types, such as bladder urothelial cells and epithelial cells of the salivary glands. Five muscarinic receptor subtypes (M1-M5) have been described, of which M2 and M3 are predominant in the detrusor. The M2 subtype is more numerous, but the M3 subtype is functionally more important in bladder contractions [207,208]. Antimuscarinic effects might also be induced or modulated through other cell types, such as the bladder urothelium or by the central nervous system [209,210]. The following muscarinic receptor antagonists are licensed for treating OAB/storage symptoms: darifenacin hydrobromide (darifenacin); fesoterodine fumarate (fesoterodine); oxybutynin hydrochloride (oxybutynin); propiverine hydrochloride (propiverine); solifenacin succinate (solifenacin); tolterodine tartrate (tolterodine); and trospium chloride. Transdermal preparations of oxybutynin have been formulated and evaluated in clinical trials [211,212]. Efficacy: Antimuscarinics were mainly tested in females in the past, as it was believed that LUTS in men were caused by the prostate, so should be treated with prostate-specific drugs. However, there is no scientific data for this assumption [213]. A sub-analysis of an open-label trial of OAB patients showed that age, but not gender had an impact on urgency, frequency, or urgency incontinence [214]. In a pooled analysis, which included a sub-analysis of male patients, fesoterodine 8 mg was superior to tolterodine extended release (ER) 4 mg for the improvement of severe urgency episodes/24 hours and the OAB-q Symptom Bother score at week twelve, the urinary retention rate was around 2% [215]. The efficacy of antimuscarinics as single agents in men with OAB in the absence of BOO have been tested [216-221]. Most trials lasted only twelve weeks. Four post hoc analyses of large RCTs on the treatment of OAB in women and men without presumed BOO were performed focusing only on the men [213,217,222]. Tolterodine can significantly reduce urgency incontinence, daytime or 24-hour frequency and urgency-related voiding whilst improving patient perception of treatment benefit [223]. Solifenacin significantly improved mean patient perception of bladder condition scores, mean OAB questionnaire scores, and overall perception of bladder problems. Fesoterodine improved micturition frequency, urgency episodes, and UUI episodes. In open-label trials with tolterodine, daytime frequency, nocturia, UUI, and IPSS were significantly reduced compared with baseline values after twelve to 25 weeks [218,221]. The TIMES RCT reported that tolterodine ER monotherapy significantly improved UUI episodes per 24 hours compared to placebo, at week twelve. Tolterodine ER did not significantly improve urgency, IPSS total or QoL score compared with placebo [220]. A further analysis showed that men with PSA levels of < 1.3 ng/mL (smaller prostates) might benefit more from antimuscarinics [224]. Two other studies found a positive effect of antimuscarinics in patients with OAB and concomitant BPO [221,225]. In a small RCT propiverine improved frequency and urgency episodes [225]. Tolerability and safety: Antimuscarinic drug trials generally show approximately 3-10% withdrawals, which is similar to placebo. Drug-related adverse events include dry mouth (up to 16%), constipation (up to 4%), micturition difficulties (up to 2%), nasopharyngitis (up to 3%), and dizziness (up to 5%). Increased PVR in men without BOO is minimal and similar to placebo. Nevertheless, fesoterodine 8 mg showed higher PVRs (+20.2 mL) than placebo (-0.6 mL) or fesoterodine 4 mg (+9.6 mL) [218]. Incidence of urinary retention in men without BOO was similar to placebo for tolterodine (0-1.3% vs. 0-1.4%). With fesoterodine 8 mg, 5.3% had symptoms, which was higher than placebo or fesoterodine 4 mg (both 0.8%). These symptoms appeared during the first two weeks of treatment and mainly affected men aged 66 years or older. Theoretically antimuscarinics might decrease bladder strength, and hence might be associated with PVR or urinary retention. A twelve week safety study on men with mild-to-moderate BOO showed that tolterodine increased the PVR (49 mL vs. 16 mL) but not AUR (3% in both arms) [226]. The urodynamic effects included larger bladder volumes at first detrusor contraction, higher maximum cystometric capacity, and decreased bladder contractility index, Qmax was unchanged. This trial indicated that short-term treatment with antimuscarinics in men with BOO is safe [213]. Practical considerations: Not all antimuscarinics have been tested in elderly men, and long-term studies on the efficacy of muscarinic receptor antagonists in men of any age with LUTS are not yet available. In addition, only patients with low PVR volumes at baseline were included in the studies. These drugs should therefore be prescribed with caution, and regular re-evaluation of symptom scores and PVR is advised. Men should be advised to discontinue medication if worsening voiding LUTS or urinary stream is noted after initiation of therapy. Summary of evidenceLEAntimuscarinic monotherapy can significantly improve urgency, UUI, and increased daytime frequency.2Antimuscarinic monotherapy can be associated with increased PVR after therapy, but acute retention is a rare event in men with a PVR volume of < 150 mL at baseline.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingUse muscarinic receptor antagonists in men with moderate-to-severe LUTS who mainly have bladder storage symptoms.StrongDo not use antimuscarinic overactive bladder medications in men with a post-void residual volume > 150 mL.Weak 