6.3.5. Second relapse. No RCTs have been reported for patients with second relapse and conventional therapy appears to have limited effect. For patients who have received two series of conventionally dosed therapy (first line and first-salvage), HDCT with autologous stem cell support should be used although the prospect of cure is < 25% [248]. Retrospective data from Indiana University suggest that patients who completed HDCT may derive additional benefit from daily maintenance therapy with oral etoposide for three months post HDCT [254]. Prospective evaluation of this in a randomised phase II trial is ongoing. Patients relapsing within four to eight weeks after platinum-based therapy, or who are progressing despite platinum-based therapy, as well as those relapsing shortly after HDCT, are considered as cisplatin refractory. Combinations of gemcitabine and oxaliplatin or the triple combination of gemcitabine, oxaliplatin and paclitaxel have resulted in response rates of 25-45% in this setting. Cisplatin re-challenge in association with gemcitabine and paclitaxel may be considered in patients with adequate renal function [255]. For patients with a second relapse not responding to the combination of oxaliplatin and gemcitabine or the triple combination, inclusion in clinical trials is encouraged. Patients with a good response undergoing subsequent resection of residual tumour lesions may still have a 15-20% chance of long-term cure [239,256]. Various targeted agents have generally failed in refractory disease, including immune checkpoint inhibitors [247-253,257]. Trials combining PD1/PDL-1 and CTLA4 inhibitors are ongoing, however, even for those combinations early results are not encouraging. 6.3.5.1. Late relapse (more than two years after end of first-line treatment) Late relapse is defined as recurrence more than two years after completion of successful primary treatment of metastatic TC [203,258]. According to a pooled analysis, this occurs in 1.4% and 3.2% of seminoma and non-seminoma patients, respectively [259]. Based on a population-based study, all late-relapsing seminoma patients have viable GCT [260]. These can be treated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy [261]. In contrast, patients with late-relapsing NSGCT should undergo surgical resection when feasible, alone or in combination with chemotherapy. Some patients, including those with rapidly rising β-hCG, may benefit from induction salvage chemotherapy with subsequent reconsideration of surgery for resection of persisting residual masses [262]. In general, however, surgery represents the mainstay of treatment and it should be performed in most patients when feasible irrespective of the level of their tumour markers, in order to completely resect all viable GCT post-pubertal teratoma [261-265]. Survival strongly relates to the histology of the recurrent lesions rather than that of the initial disease. If not completely resectable, biopsies should be obtained for histological evaluation to direct salvage chemotherapy based on the tumour phenotype. Review by an experienced pathologist is critical to avoid misinterpretation of the therapeutic morphological changes that occur with the treatment of GCT [266]. If the patient responds to salvage chemotherapy, secondary surgery should then be undertaken if feasible. With unresectable, but localised refractory disease, stereotactic or conventional radiotherapy may be considered. To avoid excess mortality, late relapses should be treated only at centres experienced in managing such patients [267]. 