4.13. Unknown stone composition [16]. An accurate medical history is the first step towards identifying risk factors as summarised in sections 3.1.3 and 4.13.1 and Fig. 4.1. Diagnostic imaging begins with a US examination of both kidneys to establish whether the patient is stone-free. Stone detection by the US should be followed by KUB and unenhanced multislice CT in adults to differentiate between calcium-containing and non-calcium stones. Blood analysis may demonstrate severe metabolic and organic disorders, such as renal insufficiency, HPT or other hypercalcaemic states and hyperuricaemia. In children with GFR lower than 30 ml/min, oxalaemia should also be checked. Urinalysis is performed routinely with a dipstick test as described above. A urine culture is required if there are signs of infection. Urine pH < 5.5 in 24-hour urine collection indicates hyper-acidic urine, which could promote uric acid crystallisation. Urine pH > 6.2 in 24-hour urine collection may indicate RTA if UTI is excluded [642,644]. Microscopy of urinary sediment can help to discover rare stone types because crystals of 2,8-dihydroxyadenine, cystine, and xanthine are pathognomonic for the corresponding disease. In cases in which the presence of cystine is doubtful, a cyanide nitroprusside colorimetric qualitative test can be used to detect the presence of cystine in urine, with a sensitivity of 72% and specificity of 95%. False-positive results are possible in patients with Fanconi’s syndrome or homocystinuria or in those taking various drugs, including ampicillin or sulfa-containing medication [698,699]. Following this programme, the most probable stone type can be assumed, and specific patient evaluation can follow. Further metabolic investigations will depend on the presence of risk factors (see section 3.1.3) and on the results of previous investigations. However, if any expulsed stone material is available, it should be analysed for diagnostic confirmation or correction. 4.13.1. Recommendations for investigations for the assessment of patients with stones of unknown composition [17,23,62,587] RecommendationsStrength ratingInvestigationRationale for investigationTake a medical history• Stone history (former stone events, family history)• Dietary habits• Medication chartStrongPerform diagnostic imaging• Ultrasound in the case of a suspected stone• Un-enhanced helical computed tomography• Determination of Hounsfield units provides information about the possible stone compositionStrongPerform a blood analysis• Creatinine• Calcium (ionised calcium or total calcium + albumin)• Uric acidStrongPerform a urinalysis• pH measurement• Dipstick test: leukocytes, erythrocytes, nitrites• Protein, specific weight• Urine cultures• Microscopy of urinary sediment (morning urine)• Cyanide nitroprusside test (cystine exclusion)Further examinations depend on the results of the investigations listed above.Strong 