4.4. Calcium oxalate stones. The criteria for identification of calcium oxalate stone formers with a high risk of recurrences and comorbidities are listed in section 3.1.3. 4.4.1. Diagnosis Blood analysis requires measurement of creatinine, sodium, potassium, chloride, ionised calcium (or total calcium + albumin), phosphate, uric acid; and, in the case of increased calcium levels, parathyroid hormone (PTH) and vitamin D. Urinalysis requires measurement of urine volume, urine pH, specific weight, calcium, oxalate, uric acid, citrate, sodium, and magnesium. Figure 4.2 summarises the diagnostic steps for calcium oxalate stones. Figure 4.2 Diagnostic algorithm for Calcium Oxalate stones 4.4.2. Interpretation of results and aetiology The most common metabolic abnormalities associated with calcium stone formation are hypercalciuria, which affects 30-60% of adult stone formers, and hyperoxaluria (26-67%), followed by hyperuricosuria (15-46%), hypomagnesuria (7-23%), and hypocitraturia (5-29%). However, ranges tend to differ based on ethnicity [624]. Elevated levels of ionised calcium in serum (or total calcium and albumin) require assessment of intact PTH to confirm or exclude suspected hyperparathyroidism (HPT).Consistently low pH (< 5.5) or 24-hour urine pH < 5.5 may promote co-crystallisation of uric acid and calcium oxalate.Similarly, increased uric acid excretion (> 4 mmol/day in adults or > 12 mg/kg/day in children) can act as a promoter.A pH > 6.2 in a 24-hour urine collection may indicate RTA provided UTI has been excluded. An ammonium chloride loading test confirms distal RTA (Section 4.6.5).Hypercalciuria may be associated with normocalcemia (idiopathic hypercalciuria, or granulomatous diseases) or hypercalcemia (hyperparathyroidism, granulomatous diseases, vitamin D excess, or malignancy).Hypocitraturia (male < 1.7 mmol/d, female < 1.9 mmol/d) may be idiopathic or secondary to metabolic acidosis or hypokalaemia.Oxalate excretion > 0.5 mmol/day in adults confirms hyperoxaluria (see Table 4.3 for the values in children).- primary hyperoxaluria (oxalate excretion mostly > 1 mmol/day), appears in three genetically determined forms;- secondary hyperoxaluria (oxalate excretion > 0.5 mmol/day, usually < 1 mmol/day), occurs due to intestinal hyperabsorption of oxalate or extreme dietary oxalate intake;- mild hyperoxaluria (oxalate excretion 0.45-0.85 mmol/day), commonly found in idiopathic calcium oxalate stone formers.Hypomagnesuria (< 3.0 mmol/day) may be related to poor dietary intake or to reduced intestinal absorption (chronic diarrhoea). Figure 4.3: Therapeutic algorithm for calcium oxalate stones1 Be aware of excess calcium excretion.2 tid = three times/day (24h).3 No magnesium therapy for patients with renal insufficiency.4 There is no evidence that combination therapy (thiazide + citrate) or (thiazide + allopurinol) is superior to thiazide therapy alone [588,625]5 Febuxostat 80 mg/d.* Low evidence (see text)** Calciuria is a continuous variable and treatment may be adjusted to clinical need even when below the threshold indicated.*** Patients on hydrochlorothiazide should be advised to get their skin checked on a regular basis as they have a higher risk of developing NMSC and some forms of melanoma. In patients with a history of skin cancer, the indication for treatment with hydrochlorothiazide should be thoroughly reviewed [621-623] 4.4.3. Specific treatment General preventive measures are recommended for fluid intake and diet. Hyperoxaluric stone formers should consume foods with low oxalate content, whereas hyperuricosuric stone formers benefit from daily dietary reduction of purine. Figure 4.3 summarises the pharmacological treatment of calcium oxalate stones [557,564,587-590,593,594,596,600,603-605,609-616,624,626-629]. There is only low-level evidence for the efficacy of preventing stone recurrence based on pre-treatment stone composition examination and biochemistry measures, or on-treatment biochemistry measures [557]. One RCT concluded that treatment with hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) does not differ substantially from placebo in the prevention of stone recurrence of kidney stones in patients at high risk for recurrence [630]. However, the study was not powered to show any difference of HCTZ over placebo [631]. In fact, the study’s main objective based on the author’s protocol [631], was to investigate the existence of a dose-response relationship, i.e., a linear trend for three different doses of HCTZ (12.5, 25 mg, and 50 mg/day) on stone recurrence, and this was shown. In addition, the hypercalciuria levels in the population enrolled in the study were significantly lower than the threshold the EAU guidelines recommend being administered to patients (Figure 4.3). 4.4.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for pharmacological treatments for patients with specific abnormalities in urine composition (based on 24-hour urine samples) Summary of evidenceLEAlkaline citrates can reduce stone formation.1aThiazides reduces calciuria.1aOxalate restriction is beneficial if hyperoxaluria is present.2bAlkaline citrates can reduce stone formation in enteric hyperoxaluria.4Calcium supplement can reduce stone formation in enteric hyperoxaluria.2A diet reduced in fat and oxalate can be beneficial in reducing stone formation.3Alkaline citrates and sodium bicarbonate can be used if hypocitraturia is present.1bAllopurinol is first-line treatment of hyperuricosuria.1aFebuxostat is second-line treatment of hyperuricosuria.1bAvoid excessive intake of animal protein in hyperuricosuria.1bRestricted intake of salt is beneficial if there is high urinary sodium excretion.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingPrescribe thiazide or alkaline citrates or both in case of hypercalciuria*.StrongAdvise oxalate restriction if hyperoxaluria is present.WeakOffer alkaline citrates in enteric hyperoxaluria.WeakOffer calcium supplement in enteric hyperoxaluria.StrongAdvise reduced dietary fat and oxalate in enteric hyperoxaluria.WeakPrescribe alkaline citrates or sodium bicarbonate in case of hypocitraturia.StrongPrescribe allopurinol in case of hyperuricosuria.StrongOffer febuxostat as second-line treatment of hyperuricosuria.StrongAvoid excessive intake of animal protein in hyperuricosuria.StrongAdvise restricted intake of salt if there is high urinary sodium excretion.Strong * Patients on hydrochlorothiazide should be advised to get their skin checked on a regular basis as they have a higher risk of developing an NMSC and some forms of melanoma. In patients with a history of skin cancer, the indication for treatment with hydrochlorothiazide should be thoroughly reviewed [621-623] 