4.5. Calcium phosphate stones. Some calcium phosphate stone formers are at high risk of recurrence. Further information on identifying high-risk patients is provided in section 3.1.3. Calcium phosphate mainly appears in two completely different minerals: carbonate apatite and brushite. Carbonate apatite crystallisation occurs at a pH > 6.8 and may be associated with infection. Brushite crystallises at an optimum pH of 6.5-6.8 at high urinary concentrations of calcium (> 8 mmol/day) and phosphate (> 35 mmol/day). Its occurrence is not related to UTI. Possible causes of calcium phosphate stones include HPT, RTA, and UTI; each of which requires different therapy. 4.5.1. Diagnosis Diagnosis requires blood analysis for creatinine, sodium, potassium, chloride, ionised calcium (or total calcium + albumin), phosphate, and PTH (in the case of increased calcium levels). Urinalysis includes measurement of volume, urine pH, specific weight, calcium, phosphate, and citrate. 4.5.2. Interpretation of results and aetiology General preventive measures are recommended for fluid intake and diet. The diagnostic and therapeutic algorithm for calcium phosphate stones is shown in Figure 4.4. Figure 4.4: Diagnostic and therapeutic algorithm for calcium phosphate stonesHPT = hyperparathyroidism; RTA = renal tubular acidosis; UTI = urinary tract infection.* Patients on hydrochlorothiazide should be advised to get their skin checked on a regular basis as they have a higher risk of developing NMSC and some forms of melanoma. In patients with a history of skin cancer, the indication for treatment with hydrochlorothiazide should be thoroughly reviewed [621-623] 4.5.3. Pharmacological therapy [557,587,596,609,610,614,632] Hyperparathyroidism and RTA are common causes of calcium phosphate stone formation. Most patients with primary HPT require surgery. Renal tubular acidosis can be corrected pharmacologically including with bicarbonate or alkaline citrate therapy. If primary HPT and RTA have been excluded, pharmacotherapy for calcium phosphate calculi depends on the effective reduction of urinary calcium levels using thiazides. For infection-associated calcium phosphate stones, it is important to consider the guidance given for infection stones. 4.5.4. Summary of evidence and recommendation for the management of calcium phosphate Stones Summary of evidenceLEThiazide decreases calciuria.1a RecommendationStrength ratingPrescribe thiazide in case of hypercalciuria > 8 mmol/24 hours.Strong 