4.6. Disorders and diseases related to calcium stones. 4.6.1. Hyperparathyroidism [633-636] Primary HPT is responsible for an estimated 5% of all calcium stone formation. Renal stones occur in approximately 20% of patients with primary HPT. Elevated levels of PTH significantly increase calcium turnover, leading to hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and bone disease. Serum calcium may be mildly elevated and serum PTH may be within the upper normal limits, therefore, repeated measurements may be needed; preferably with the patient fasting. Stones of HPT patients may contain both calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate. Nephrocalcinosis and CKD may also occur. If HPT is suspected, neck exploration should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. If surgery is contraindicated, primary HPT can be treated with cinacalcet. 4.6.2. Granulomatous Diseases [637] Granulomatous diseases, such as sarcoidosis, may be complicated by hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria secondary to increased calcitriol production. The latter is independent of PTH control, leading to increased calcium absorption in the gastrointestinal tract and suppression of PTH. Treatment focuses on the activity of the granulomatous diseases and may require steroids, hydroxychloroquine, or ketoconazole. Treatment should be reserved for a specialist. 4.6.3. Primary Hyperoxaluria [606] Patients with primary hyperoxaluria (PH) should be referred to a specialised center, as successful management requires an experienced interdisciplinary team. The main therapeutic aim is to reduce endogenous oxalate production, which is increased in patients with PH. In approximately one-third of patients with PH type I, pyridoxine therapy normalises or significantly reduces urinary oxalate excretion. The goal of adequate urine dilution is achieved by adjusting fluid intake to 3.5-4.0 L/day in adults (children 1.5 L/m2 body surface area) and following a circadian drinking regimen. Therapeutic options for preventing calcium oxalate crystallisation include hyper-diuresis, alkaline citrates, magnesium, and Lumasiran, an RNAi agent, a new treatment for reducing the synthesis of oxalate of PH type 1 [638]. Treatment regimens are: pyridoxine in PH type I: 5-20 mg/kg/day according to urinary oxalate excretion and patient tolerance;alkaline citrate: 3.25-9.75 g/day in adults, 0.1-0.15 mq/kg/day in children;magnesium: 200-400 mg/day (no magnesium in the case of renal insufficiency).Lumasiran: Subcutaneous injection with dose and timing adjusted according to body weight and duration of treatment:- Initial Dose: Bodyweight < 10 kg: 6 mg/kg; Bodyweight 10-20 kg: 6 mg/kg; Bodyweight > 20 kg: 3 mg/kg; once per month for three months subcutaneous injection.- Maintenance starting one month after initial doses: Bodyweight < 10 kg: 3 mg/kg 1-mal monthly; Bodyweight 10-20 kg: 6 mg/kg every three months, Bodyweight > 20 kg: 3 mg/kg [639] 4.6.3.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for the management of primary hyperoxaluria Summary of evidenceLEPyridoxine can reduce the urinary oxalate excretion in primary hyperoxaluria type 1.3Lumasiran can reduce the urinary oxalate excretion in primary hyperoxaluria type 1.1b RecommendationStrength ratingPrescribe pyridoxine for primary hyperoxaluria type 1.StrongPrescribe Lumasiran for primary hyperoxaluria type 1 if not responsive to pyridoxine.Strong 4.6.4. Enteric hyperoxaluria [575,580,640-642] Enteric hyperoxaluria is a particularly problematic condition in patients with intestinal malabsorption of fat. This abnormality is associated with a high risk of stone formation and is seen after intestinal resection and malabsorptive bariatric surgery, as well as in Crohn’s disease and pancreas insufficiency. In addition to hyperoxaluria, these patients usually present with hypocitraturia due to loss of alkali. Urine pH is usually low, as are urinary calcium and urine volume. All these abnormalities contribute to high levels of supersaturation with calcium oxalate, crystalluria, stone formation, and less frequently to nephrocalcinosis and CKD. Specific preventive measures are: restricted intake of oxalate-rich foods [575];restricted fat intake [575];calcium supplementation at mealtimes to enable calcium oxalate complex formation in the intestine [580,640-642];sufficient fluid intake to balance the intestinal loss of water caused by diarrhoea;alkaline citrates to raise urinary pH and citrate. Summary of evidenceLEAlkaline citrates can be beneficial to replace citrate loss and raise urine pH.3Calcium supplements with meals enable calcium oxalate complex formation in the intestine.2bReduction in dietary fat and oxalate can be beneficial in intestinal malabsorption.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPrescribe alkaline citrates for enteric hyperoxaluria.WeakAdvise patients to take calcium supplements with meals.StrongAdvise patients to follow a diet with a low fat and oxalate content.Weak 4.6.5. Renal tubular acidosis [557,596,643,644] Renal tubular acidosis is caused by severe impairment of proton (type I) or bicarbonate handling (type II) along the nephron. Kidney stone formation occurs in patients with distal RTA type I. Figure 4.5 outlines the diagnosis of RTA type I. Table 4.7 shows acquired and inherited causes of RTA. Figure 4.5: Diagnosis of renal tubular acidosis BGA = blood gas analysis; RTA = renal tubular acidosis.** An alternative ammonium chloride loading test using 1-day NH4Cl load with 0.05 g/kg body weight might provide similar results and may be better tolerated by the patient [645]. A second alternative in these cases could be the furosemide/fludrocortisone acidification test [646] Renal tubular acidosis can be acquired or inherited. Reasons for acquired RTA can be chronic obstructive uropathy, recurrent pyelonephritis, acute tubular necrosis, renal transplantation, analgesic nephropathy, sarcoidosis, Sjögren syndrome and other autoimmune diseases, medullary sponge kidney, liver cirrhosis, sickle cell anaemia, idiopathic hypercalciuria, and primary parathyroidism; it may also be drug-induced (e.g., amphotericin B, foscarnet, lithium, zonisamide, and other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors). Table 4.7: Inherited causes of renal tubular acidosis Type - inheritanceGene/gene product/functionPhenotypeAutosomal dominantSLC4A1/AE1/Cl-bicarbonateexchangerHypercalciuria, hypokalaemia,rickets/osteomalaciaAutosomal recessive with hearing lossATP6V1B1/B1 sub-unit of vacuolar H-ATPase/proton secretionHypercalciuria, hypokalaemia,rickets/osteomalaciaAutosomal recessiveATP6V0A4/A4 sub-unit of vacuolar H-ATPase/proton secretionHypercalciuria, hypokalaemia,rickets/osteomalacia Very rarely biallelic causative variants in FOXI1 and WDR72 genes have also been identified. The main therapeutic aim of RTA treatment is restoring a normal acid-base equilibrium. Despite the alkaline pH of urine in RTA, alkalinisation using alkaline citrates or sodium bicarbonate is important for normalising the metabolic changes (intracellular acidosis) responsible for stone formation (Table 4.8) and bone demineralisation. The alkali load reduces tubular re-absorption of citrate, which in turn normalises citrate excretion. Therapeutic success can be monitored by venous blood gas analysis (base excess: ± 2.0 mmol/L) in complete RTA. If excessive calcium excretion (> 8 mmol/day) persists after re-establishing acid-base equilibrium, thiazides may lower urinary calcium excretion. Table 4.8: Pharmacological treatment of renal tubular acidosis Biochemical risk factorIndication for pharmacologicaltherapyMedicationHypercalciuriaCalcium excretion > 8 mmol/dayHydrochlorothiazide*,- in adults: 25 mg/day initially, up to 50 mg/day- in children: 0.5-1 mg/kg/dayAlternatives in adults:Chlorthalidone 25 mg/dIndapamide 2.5 mg/dInadequate urine pHCitrate excretion male < 1.7 mmol/day, female < 1.9 mmol/dayAlkaline citrate, 3.25-9.75 g/day divided in three dosesORSodium bicarbonate, 1.5 g, three times daily * Patients on hydrochlorothiazide should be advised to get their skin checked on a regular basis as they have a higher risk of developing NMSC and some forms of melanoma. In patients with a history of skin cancer, the indication treatment with hydrochlorothiazide should be thoroughly reviewed [621-623] 4.6.5.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of tubular acidosis Summary of evidenceLEAlkaline citrates can be beneficial in distal renal tubular acidosis.2bThiazides are beneficial for hypercalciuria.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingPrescribe alkaline citrates for distal renal tubular acidosis.StrongAddress normalization of bicarbonatremia and citraturia with alkaline citrateStrongPrescribe thiazides for hypercalciuria.Strong 4.6.6. Nephrocalcinosis [647] Nephrocalcinosis (NC) refers to increased calcium crystal deposition within the renal cortex or medulla and occurs alone or in combination with renal stones. There are various metabolic causes. The main causes are HPT, primary and enteric hyperoxalurias, genetic and acquired RTA, medullary sponge kidney, vitamin D metabolic disorders, sarcoidosis, idiopathic hypercalciuria and hypocitraturia, and genetic disorders, including Dent’s disease and Bartter’s syndrome. The many causes of NC mean there is no single standard therapy. Therapeutic attention must focus on the underlying metabolic or genetic disease, on the frequent association with CKD while minimising the biochemical risk factors. 4.6.6.1. Diagnosis Diagnosis requires the following blood analysis: PTH (in the case of increased calcium levels), vitamin D and metabolites, vitamin A, sodium, potassium, magnesium, chloride, and bicarbonate. Urinalysis should investigate urine pH profile at different times of the day daily urine volume, specific weight of urine, and levels of calcium, oxalate, phosphate, uric acid, magnesium, and citrate [545]. 