4.7. Uric acid and ammonium urate stones. All uric acid and ammonium urate stone formers are considered to be at high risk of recurrence [23]. Uric acid nephrolithiasis is responsible for approximately 10% of renal stones [648] and is associated with hyperuricosuria or low urinary pH. Hyperuricosuria may be a result of dietary excess, endogenous overproduction (enzyme defects), myeloproliferative disorders, chemotherapy drugs, gout or catabolism [542]. Low urinary pH may be caused by decreased urinary ammonium excretion (insulin resistance, gout, Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease [ADPKD]), increased endogenous acid production (insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, or exercise-induced lactic acidosis), increased acid intake (high animal protein intake), or increased base loss (diarrhoea) [542]. Ammonium urate stones are extremely rare, comprising < 1% of all types of urinary stones. They are associated with UTI, malabsorption (inflammatory bowel disease and ileostomy diversion or laxative abuse), phosphate deficiency, hypokalemia, and malnutrition. Suggestions on uric acid and ammonium urate nephrolithiasis are based on level 3 and 4 evidence. Chronic kidney disease is frequently observed. 4.7.1. Diagnosis Figure 4.6 shows the diagnostic algorithm for uric acid stones and figure 4.7 shows the therapeutic algorithm for uric acid and ammonium urate stones. Blood analysis requires measurement of creatinine and uric acid levels. Urinalysis requires measurement of urine volume, urine pH, specific weight of urine, and uric acid level. Urine culture is needed in the case of ammonium urate stones. 4.7.2. Interpretation of results Uric acid and ammonium urate stones form under completely different biochemical conditions. Low urine pH promotes uric acid crystallisation. Hyperuricosuria is defined as uric acid excretion > 4 mmol/day and day and > 5 mmol/day in adult females and males, respectively, or > 0.12 mmol/kg/day in children. Hyperuricaemia may be present, but there is only weak evidence for its association with stone formation [649]. Hyperuricosuric calcium oxalate stone formation can be distinguished from uric acid stone formation by urinary pH, which is usually > 5.5 in calcium oxalate stone formation and < 5.5 in uric acid stone formation and occasional absence of hyperuricosuria in patients with pure uric acid stones [650,651]. Ammonium urate crystals form in urine at pH > 6.5, high uric acid concentration in urine when ammonium is present [652,653]. 4.7.3. Specific treatment General preventive measures are recommended for fluid intake and diet. Hyperuricosuric stone formers benefit from purine reduction in their daily diet. Figure 4.6 describes pharmacological treatment [23,648,650-660]. For uric acid stones, allopurinol may change the stone composition distribution in patients with gout to a pattern similar to that in stone formers without gout [661]. Figure 4.6: Diagnostic algorithm for uric acid stonesADPKD = autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; G6P = glucose-6 phosphate dehydrogenase; HGPT = hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase; PRPS = phosphoribosyl-pyrophosphate synthetase superactivity; XO = xanthine oxidase.  Figure 4.7: Therapeutic algorithm for uric acid- and ammonium urate stones1 d: day.2 tid: three times a day.3 A higher pH may lead to calcium phosphate stone formation.4 In patients with high uric acid excretion, allopurinol may be helpful. 4.7.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of uric acid- and ammonium urate stones Summary of evidenceLEAlkaline citrates can be beneficial to alkalinise the urine in uric acid stone formers.3Allopurinol can be beneficial in hyperuricosuric urate stone formers.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingPrescribe alkaline citrates to alkalinise the urine in uric acid stone formers.StrongPrescribe allopurinol in hyperuricosuric urate stone formers.Strong 