3.23.1. Pre-operative fasting, intra-operative fluid therapy, post-operative feeding, fasting and fluid management. 3.23.1.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Children have a different total body fluid distribution, renal physiology and electrolyte requirements, as well as weaker cardiovascular compensation mechanisms, compared to adults [1524]. During development, children have a high metabolic rate and lower fat and nutrient stores which means they are more susceptible to metabolic disturbances caused by surgical stress [1525]. The metabolic response to anaesthesia and surgery in infants and children is related to the severity of the operation [1526]. 3.23.1.2. Disease management 3.23.1.2.1. Pre-operative fasting Pre-operative fasting has been advocated for elective surgery to avoid the complications associated with pulmonary aspiration during induction of anaesthesia. New regimens include an one hour limitation for clear liquids [1527,1528] without increased risk of pulmonary aspiration [1529]. Several studies have shown that fasting times in clinical practice often exceed the guidelines with average fasting times of six to ten hours [1528-1530]. Compared to adults, children have a higher metabolic rate and low glycogen stores and impaired gluconeogenesis, which makes hypoglycaemia an important issue to consider, especially in children< 36 months old [1528]. Therefore, it is important to prevent extended fasting times. Clear-liquid carbohydrate drinks have been proposed to reduce these fasting times [1531]. The presence of Type I diabetes does not necessitate different fasting instructions from those for healthy children [1532]. Depending on the length and the scale of the procedure, special attention to appropriate insulin administration, management of hypo- and hyperglycaemia as well as other metabolic abnormalities, is required [1533]. Table 12 provides the current guidelines for pre-operative fasting for elective surgery [1532]. Table 12: Pre-operative fasting times for elective surgery Ingested materialMinimum fasting period (hours)Clear liquids1Breast milk3Formula milk-based products4Light meal6 3.23.1.2.2. Maintenance therapy and intra-operative fluid therapy The goal of intra-operative fluid management is to sustain homeostasis by providing the appropriate amount of parenteral fluid; this maintains adequate intravascular volume, cardiac output, and oxygen delivery to tissues at a time when normal physiological functions have been altered by surgical stress and anaesthetic agents. The main goal of intra-operative fluid management is to maintain a normal extracellular fluid volume (EFV). During the intra-operative period fluid deficits may be induced by pre-operative fasting, blood loss or third-space losses. 3.23.1.2.3. Post-operative feeding, fasting and fluid management It is not obligatory to check serum chemistry after uncomplicated surgery in children with normal pre-operative renal and hepatic function. However, if oral intake has been postponed for > 24 hours (e.g., as in intestinal surgery), there is an increased risk of electrolyte abnormalities, requiring further assessment and subsequent management, particularly with potassium. Post-operative findings, such as decreased bowel movements and ileus, may be signs of hypokalaemia. Children who undergo interventions to relieve any kind of obstructive diseases deserve particular attention, especially due to the risk of polyuria as a result of post-obstructive diuresis [1534]. In children who develop polyuria, it is important to monitor fluid intake and urine output, as well as renal function and serum electrolytes. If necessary, clinicians should not hesitate in consulting with a paediatric nephrologist. In children who have undergone non-abdominal surgery, studies have suggested that gastric motility returns to normal one hour after emergence from anaesthesia [1535]. Early post-operative intake of fluid in children who have undergone minor or non-abdominal urological surgery is associated with reduced post-operative vomiting and lower opioid use [1536] and is therefore encouraged. Intraperitoneal surgery and the use of bowel may lead to decreased bowel motility in the postoperative period which can lead to paralytic ileus. Experimental and clinical studies have shown that traditional restriction of oral intake, after abdominal surgery, has no basis on scientific evidence and adverse effect on tissue regeneration and enzymatic function has been reported. Due to those deleterious effects of fasting, early enteral nutrition is preferred to parenteral nutrition [1537]. In new-borns, early intragastric, small-volume breast is well tolerated in the post-operative period and seems to provide a trophic effect on gut mucosa [1537]. Chewing gum is a type of sham feeding that promotes intestinal motility, via cephalic-vagal stimulation. It is usually well tolerated and accepted by older children without any contraindication. Although the evidence is limited, it can potentially enhance bowel recovery in the postoperative period in children [1538]. The ERAS protocol is a patient-centred, multimodal approach to optimize postoperative recovery. This protocol includes pre- and intraoperative element such as minimal pre-operative fasting and careful intra-operative fluid management and focuses on post-operative care. The post-operative ERAS protocol suggests starting clear fluid intake on the evening of surgery and a normal diet the day after surgery and thereby early discontinuation of IV fluids. Further focus is on early mobilization, preventing epidurals and omitting or early removal of external tubes [1539]. The implementation of an ERAS protocol has resulted in a shorter length of hospital stays, faster bowel recovery and reduced the needs of post-operative opioid-free administration [1539,1540]. The implementation of ERAS protocols does not seem to result in higher complication and readmission rates; instead, some studies have even demonstrated a significant reduction in complication occurrence [1539]. When implementing ERAS in children with neurological abnormalities special attention should be given to bowel management with pre-operative treatment of constipation and early post-operative continuation of routine bowel management. 3.23.1.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of peri-operative fluid management Summary of evidenceLEThe current evidence recommends reducing clear fluid fasting to 1 h, reducing breast milk fasting to 3h, reducing formula milk-based products to 4h and allowing a light meal 6h before anaesthesia induction for elective procedures.1Following abdominal surgery ERAS protocols can be used to reduce recovery times and complications.1 RecommendationsStrength ratingEnsure shorter pre-operative fasting periods for elective surgeries (one hour for clear liquids, three hours for breast milk, four hours for formula milk-based products and six hours for a light meal).StrongStart early postoperative oral fluid intake in all patients scheduled for minor surgical procedures.StrongUse enhanced recovery after surgery protocols for abdominal surgery in children with pre-existing normal bowel function.Strong 