3.23.4. Thromboprophylaxis management: general information. Thromboprophylaxis in children involves preventive measures aimed at reducing the risk of blood clot formation. Unlike adults, the majority of children do not require thromboprophylaxis after surgery. It is only considered in certain high-risk situations such as underlying medical conditions like malignancies, congenital heart disease etc. Moreover, there are very limited data on the safety and efficacy of anticoagulants in paediatric practice. 3.23.4.1. Epidemiology, aetiology, pathophysiology The incidence of venous thrombo-embolism (VTE) in children is low, but has increased due to an increased use of central venous catheters (CVL) and an improvement in detection [1572]. Some authors suggest an incidence of five to eight cases of symptomatic VTE per 10.000 hospital admissions (0.05%-0.08%) but the true incidence may be higher as the majority of VTEs are clinically silent in children [1573]. In infants, VTE is most often associated with sepsis, congenital haematological disorders, and malignancies. At adolescence, the physiology of the coagulation system matures and additional risk factors such as smoking, obesity, pregnancy, and oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives become relevant. There is a 2:1 preponderance of females among adolescents who develop VTE. The risk of VTE after urological surgery has been shown to have an incidence of 0.12%, which increases to 0.2% for prolonged hospitalization [1574,1575]. Before adolescence, the absolute risk of VTE following major surgery, trauma, or immobilization is low, even in children who have thrombophilia [1576]. Therefore, thromboprophylaxis is not recommended. The risk of developing VTE should focus on adolescents (> 13 years) particularly those with one or more risk factors such as those mentioned above [1577]. General preventive measures are fundamental to prevent VTE and should include: adequate peri- and post-operative hydration, early mobilization after surgery and removal of CVLs as soon as possible. In post-pubertal girls undergoing any kind of surgery, consideration should be given to withholding the combined contraceptive pill for four weeks prior to planned surgery, particularly if there is a strong family history of thrombosis or a known thrombophilic risk factor [1573]. 3.23.4.2. Diagnostic evaluation Identifying thrombophilic risk factors in the family and patient history is important. Symptoms are similar to adult patients with pain, oedema of the dependent areas and development of collateral vessel circulation. However, children with VTE also have some unique presentations such as purpura fulminans. As with adults, the diagnosis of VTE in the upper venous system, is confirmed using doppler ultrasound and if necessary with venography. However, the optimal diagnostic test for lower limb VTE and pulmonary embolism in children is undefined at the present time but ultrasound is the first approach [1578]. 3.23.4.3. Disease management The aims of antithrombotic therapy in children are similar to those for adults with VTE. Management of childhood VTE is often complex, due to the frequent co-existence of medical and surgical diseases, and the fact that limited data is available on the efficacy and safety of these drugs in paediatric practice. A multidisciplinary management approach should be sought. Medical device and physiological mechanism for thromboprophylaxis Physical treatments for thromboprophylaxis are the same used for adult patients: graduated compression stockings (GCS), intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) devices and venous foot-pumps (VFPs). No paediatric sizes of GCS or IPC are yet available, so they are applicable only to older patients, usually those over 40 kg in weight or older than thirteen years. Intermittent pneumatic compression devices have been used for intra- operative use in children aged thirteen years and over who weigh > 40 kg and who are expected to have prolonged surgery [1573,1577]. The evidence to use these devices is significantly less than for anticoagulant options and few data are available in children and adolescents [1579]. They should be combined with pharmacological prophylaxis. Early mobilization and good hydration should be encouraged in all age patients. 3.23.4.4. Pharmacological treatment for thromboprophylaxis The use of anticoagulant agents to prevent VTE is very limited in children. None of the preparations are licensed in the paediatric age group. Low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs) have become the mainstay anticoagulant in the paediatric population, both for prophylaxis and treatment due to the more predictable pharmacokinetics compared with unfractionated heparin. Low molecular weight heparins allow less frequent monitoring, and have a lower incidence of serious side-effects. Compared with adult patients, children require higher doses of LMWH, which decrease with age due to a decreased thrombin production and a high renal clearance. The most commonly used drugs are enoxaparin and dalteparin and the major bleeding rate for prophylactic use of LMWH is low [1573,1577,1580]. Children older than thirteen years with multiple risk factors for thrombosis should be considered for thromboprophylaxis with LMWH especially if immobilization for more than 48 hours is expected [1580]. 3.23.4.5. Prevention of CVL-related VTE The presence of a CVL is the most significant risk factor for VTE in children. CVLs placed in the right internal jugular seem to be associated with a lower risk of VTE. There is also evidence that femoral CVLs are associated with a particularly high risk for thrombosis in children [1573] Thromboprophylaxis did not prevent CVL-related VTE both in prospective studies and RCTs because the majority of these thrombi were transient and resolved spontaneously without therapy [1581]. 3.23.4.6. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of thromboprophylaxis management Summary of evidenceLEThe incidence of perioperative thromboembolic events in the paediatric population is generally very low.1Patients > 13 years of age with additional risk factors should be considered for venous thrombo-embolism prophylaxis.1Standard anti-thrombotic prophylaxis is not recommended due to a lack of high quality RCTs and accepted guidelines concerning perioperative thromboprophylaxis in children.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingUse physical methods for venous thrombo-embolism prophylaxis (VTE) risk reduction in older children and adolescents who are at increased risk of VTE.StrongConsider low molecular weight heparin VTE prophylaxis in children, particularly adolescents, with additional risk factors.Strong 