3.1. Phimosis and other abnormalities of the penile skin. The prepuce or foreskin of the penis is often a cause of concern to parents of young boys and physicians alike [11] with 10% seeking medical advice [12]. While there are some pathological abnormalities of the foreskin, these are in fact quite rare and must be discerned from physiological variations or developmental stages. In this chapter we highlight normal development, it’s variations and how to discern this from abnormal foreskin requiring treatment, as well as various treatment options. 3.1.1. Terminology, epidemiology and pathophysiology At birth the foreskin can be retracted in 4% of boys. In 42% of neonates the tip of the glans cannot be visualised. By the end of the first year of life, retraction of the foreskin behind the glandular corona is possible in approximately 50% of boys; this increases to 89% by the age of three years. Non-retractability of the foreskin can be a physiological phase which does not require treatment in the absence of symptoms, such as painful erections or balanitis. Phimosis In phimosis the inability to retract the foreskin over the glans penis is due to a narrow ring in the prepuce. Several factors have been suggested to aid in the gradual dilation of this ring: histological changes in the prepuce, hormonal factors and stretching due to erections. While erections occur even antenatally, these may be insufficient to stretch the foreskin if it is relatively long, and therefore relative phimosis can be present for a prolonged period [13]. Epidemiological studies of the natural course of phimosis are difficult, as they are affected by treatment of a subgroup of subjects. Nonetheless, the incidence of phimosis is 9-20% in five to thirteen year-olds and just 1% in males aged sixteen to eighteen years [13,14]. Preputial adhesions Another cause of non-retractability of the prepuce are adhesions of the foreskin to the glans, and this must be distinguished from phimosis. Usually when adhesions are present, partial retraction is possible and the meatus can be visualised [14]. Adhesions are a physiological phenomenon of variable duration, present in 63% of 6-7 year-olds and 3% of 16-17 year-olds without phimosis [14]. Progressive separation of the inner prepuce from the glans is associated with build-up of epithelial debris (smegma) and aided by penile erections. During this process smegma can accumulate into nodules that may be mistaken for cysts. When released from between the skin layers smegma can resemble purulent discharge, especially when mixed with urine. There may temporarily be focal erythema. In the absence of other signs of infection, this should not be confused with balanitis. Once adhesions between the glans and inner prepuce are resolved there may be ballooning of the foreskin during voiding, particularly if the opening of the prepuce is still relatively narrow. Ballooning is not a sign of obstructed voiding and uroflows have been shown to be normal with ballooning [15]. Therefore, ballooning may be a physiological phase, and it should only be considered a problem in case of (recurring) balanitis. Paraphimosis In paraphimosis the foreskin has been retracted and cannot be brought back down to cover the glans of the penis. In children it is most likely due to manipulation, with an incidence reported to be as low as 0,2% [12]. The risk of paraphimosis is higher if there is relative phimosis. The narrow ring in the retracted prepuce may constrict the shaft at the level of the sulcus, leading to edema of the glans and retracted foreskin. Impaired perfusion may lead to necrosis of the prepuce and ultimately of the glans. Paraphimosis must be regarded as a medical emergency requiring urgent treatment [16]. Balanitis/balanoposthitis Balanoposthitis may be defined as erythema and swelling of the glans (balanitis) and/or foreskin (posthitis), with discharge of pus. It should not be confused with focal irritation due to retention of droplets of urine under the foreskin. Balanoposthitis may be seen in 6% of uncircumcised boys [12,17]. Balanitis xerotica obliterans Balanitis xerotica obliterans (BXO) is a non-painful chronic inflammatory disease which may affect the glans, foreskin, meatus and urethra. As such it is a genital form of lichen sclerosus et atrophicus [13]. Balanitis xerotica obliterans may lead to scarring, phimosis and urethral outflow problems. Histological analysis of the prepuces of children and adolescents undergoing circumcision for medical reasons shows signs of BXO in 35%-53% [18]; in boys younger than ten years this is 17% [19,20]. Inconspicuous penis There are several types of concealed or inconspicuous penis, which should be differentiated from truly small penis such as micropenis with abnormal size of the corporeal bodies or even aphallia. Buried penis and megaprepuce are congenital anomalies in which the skin is folded abnormally around the shaft. The opening of the prepuce can be narrow, prohibiting retraction similar to regular phimosis, but may also be normal. Occasionally buried penis may be due to abnormal prepubic fat distribution, which may be self-limiting with growth or weight loss. In webbed penis the penoscrotal angle is abnormal due to the scrotum being attached high on the ventral side of the shaft. Trapped penis is an iatrogenic form of buried penis which may be caused by resection of too much skin during circumcision [21]. 3.1.2. Classification and diagnostic evaluation In order to determine which cases require treatment, phimosis should be divided into a physiological and pathological type. Physiological phimosis is most likely to resolve over time without intervention, whereas pathological phimosis may not. In physiological phimosis there is no sign of scarring, and upon retraction the inner prepuce is seen bulging outward from the narrow ring in the prepuce (“pouting”). In pathological or secondary phimosis there is scarring, the narrow ring in the prepuce is fibrous, often white and thickened, and the inner layer of the prepuce is not seen coming out [22]. Balanitis xerotica obliterans is a special form of pathological phimosis. The diagnosis of adhesions, phimosis and paraphimosis is made by physical examination alone, and this can differentiate between physiological variations or pathological abnormalities. If the prepuce is not retractable, or only partly retractable, and shows a constrictive ring upon retraction back over the glans penis, a disproportion between the width of the foreskin and the diameter of the glans penis has to be assumed. In addition to the constricted foreskin, the inner prepuce may be adherend to the glans and/or frenulum breve. Balanitis xerotica obliterans remains a histopathological diagnosis as clinically discerning BXO from simple pathological phimosis by may be difficult, particularly to the untrained eye. Histopathological examination of resected foreskin is warranted due to the consequences of this diagnosis with regards to follow-up [23,24]. In buried penis, the shaft itself appears shorter upon inspection but is of normal size upon palpation, hence the name. In megaprepuce the shaft may have a normal appearance or it may resemble buried penis. The diagnosis is made based on the aspect of the penis during voiding. When the enlarged space between shaft and inner prepuce fills up with urine during voiding, this causes the entire penis to swell. Megaprepuce can be discerned from regular phimosis, in which only the tip of the penis may demonstrate ballooning. It may be helpful if caregivers show a photo or even video of the aspect of the penis during voiding. 3.1.3. Management Hygiene The foreskin should not be retracted for cleaning until this can be done easily. It should be stressed to parents/caregivers that forced retraction of a narrow foreskin may cause scar formation resulting in secondary pathological phimosis [25]. Care should be taken to reduce the foreskin back down over the glans to prevent paraphimosis. Once the foreskin is retractable this may be regularly done during bathing and becomes necessary for hygienic reasons from puberty. The production of smegma appears to increase at puberty, coinciding with the age at which most boys can retract their foreskin [22]. Conservative / medical management Physiological phimosis and adhesions do not need treatment, unless there are accompanying urogenital abnormalities. Conservative medical treatment is a valid option for primary pathological phimosis. Class 4 corticosteroid therapies were more effective over placebo and manual stretching [26]. Topical corticoid (0.05-0.1%) can be administered twice a day over a period of 4-8 weeks with a success rate of > 80% [26-29]. A publication showed that lower class corticosteroids may be almost equally effective [30]. A recurrence rate of up to 17% can be expected [31]. Effectivity of topical corticosteroids is likely to be influenced by correct application, which must be directly onto the narrow ring under gentle retraction. Similarly, after finishing the corticosteroid treatment recurrence should be prevented by continuing daily retraction of the prepuce [32]. While all types of phimosis may respond to corticosteroid treatment, the success rate may be lower in pathological phimosis. If BXO is suspected, consultation with a dermatologist should be considered [33]. Corticosteroid treatment has no systemic side effects and mean blood cortisol levels are not significantly different from an untreated group of patients [34]. The hypothalamic pituitary-adrenal axis was not influenced by local corticoid treatment [35]. However, if treatment is continued for too long or too much product is used this may cause focal atrophy and vulnerability of the skin. In general, cream may be associated with dryness and irritation, due to the nature of the product compared to ointment. Adhesion of the foreskin to the glans does not respond to corticosteroid treatment [27]. Operative management Circumcision for non-medical reasons, such as routine circumcision for cultural, religious or hygienic considerations, is not discussed in this chapter. Medical indications for surgical intervention for phimosis are recurrent balanoposthitis or symptomatic therapy-resistant phimosis. Simple ballooning of the foreskin during micturition is not an indication for surgery per se. Several indications for circumcision in the absence of symptomatic phimosis have been proposed. In boys with increased risk of urinary tract infections (UTIs) due to congenital upper tract abnormalities, circumcision may be performed to reduce the risk of UTIs [36-39]. Male circumcision significantly reduces the bacterial colonisation of the glans penis with regard to both non-uropathogenic and uropathogenic bacteria [40]. However, resolution of phimosis by corticosteroid treatment may have similar results as it was also associated with substantial reduction in recurrent UTI in uncircumcised infants [41]. (See Chapter 3.10 on urinary tract infections in children and Chapter 3.15 on vesicoureteric reflux). Routine neonatal circumcision to prevent penile carcinoma is not indicated. A meta-analysis could not find any risk in uncircumcised patients without a history of phimosis [42]. The type of operative treatment of phimosis in children is dependent on the caregivers’ preferences and can be preputioplasty or circumcision. In preputioplasty the objective is to preserve the prepuce while achieving a wider foreskin circumference with full retractability. Several surgical techniques have been described to achieve this goal: dorsal incision, partial circumcision, trident preputial plasty, combining two Z-plasties and Y-plasty [43,44]. The main disadvantage of preputioplasty is the inherent potential for recurrence of phimosis [45]. In circumcision, the prepuce is resected completely. Contra-indications for circumcision are: an acute local infection and congenital anomalies of the penis, particularly hypospadias, buried penis and megaprepuce, epispadias and congenital penile curvature, as the foreskin may be required for a reconstructive procedure [46,47]. When surgically correcting phimosis, additional issues should be addressed during the same session: adhesions are released, an associated frenulum breve is corrected by frenulotomy and the meatus is calibrated with meatoplasty added if necessary. Paraphimosis treatment Treatment of paraphimosis consists of manual compression of the oedematous tissue with a subsequent attempt to retract the tightened foreskin over the glans penis [48,49]. If this maneuver fails, a dorsal incision of the constrictive ring is required. Following acute redressing of the foreskin, additional treatment is recommended to correct any anomalies which increase the chance of recurrence. Patients should be counselled regarding prevention of paraphimosis by correctly redressing their foreskin after retraction. 3.1.4. Complications Complications following circumcision vary and have been reported between 0-30% [50]. Hung et al. found 2.9% complications in non-neonates during a 5-year follow-up period; 2.2% were early (within 30 days after circumcision). Non-healing wounds, haemorrhage, wound infection, meatal stenosis, redundant skin, non-satisfying cosmetic appearance and trapped penis all may occur [51]. The incidence of post-circumcision meatal stenosis is higher in boys with confirmed BXO compared to those who underwent circumcision for phimosis without BXO (20% vs 6%) [23]. Overall, the risk of complications appears low when done by professionals in a medical setting. 3.1.5. Follow-up Any preputial surgery requires early follow-up of four to six weeks after surgery. In case of BXO, prolonged follow up is warranted and may involve a dermatologist. Balanitis xerotica obliterans is associated with meatal pathology (stenosis) after circumcision in up to 20% of boys [20,52,53]. 3.1.6. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of phimosis Summary of evidenceLENon-retractability of the foreskin, preputial adhesions and ballooning may be a physiological phase before puberty and do not require treatment in the absence of symptoms.3Forced retraction of a narrow foreskin should be avoided to prevent scar formation which may result in secondary pathological phimosis.3Conservative treatment of phimosis with topical corticosteroids (ointment or cream) has a high success rate, but surgical treatment may be considered if preferred by caregivers or patients.1bBalanitis xerotica obliterans warrants prolonged follow up due to risk of meatal stenosis or urethral involvement.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer topical corticosteroids (ointment or cream) as first-line treatment in symptomatic phimosis.StrongConsider surgical intervention if patient/caregivers prefer for symptomatic phimosis.StrongOffer circumcision in case of Balanitis xerotica obliterans (BXO) or phimosis refractory to treatment.StrongOffer treatment for asymptomatic phimosis in infants with a risk of recurrent urinary tract infection due to upper urinary tract abnormalities (vesicoureteral reflux or posterior urethral valves).StrongInform patients about the risk of meatal stenosis in BXO.StrongAwait spontaneous resolution of asymptomatic preputial adhesions before puberty.WeakTreat paraphimosis by manual reposition and proceed to surgery if this fails.StrongDo not perform simple circumcision if phimosis is associated with other penile anomalies such as buried penis, congenital penile curvature, epispadias or hypospadias.Strong 