3.12. Monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis – bedwetting. 3.12.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis (NE), also known as bedwetting, is defined as an intermittent nocturnal incontinence. It is a relatively frequent symptom in children, 5-10% at seven years of age and 1–2% in adolescents. There is a gender difference in the incidence: two boys to one girl at any age [604]. With a spontaneous yearly resolution rate of 15% (at any age), it is considered as a relatively benign condition [579,605]. Seven out of 100 seven-year-old bedwetting children will continue to wet their bed into adulthood. Nocturnal enuresis is considered primary when a child has not yet had a prolonged period of being dry (six months). The term “secondary NE” is used when a child or adult begins wetting again after having stayed dry. Non-monosymptomatic NE is defined as the condition of NE in association with day-time lower urinary tracts symptoms (LUTS, recurrent UTIs and/or bowel dysfunction) [605,606]. The presence of constipation has a negative association with bladder capacity [607]. Nocturnal enuresis has significant secondary stressful, emotional and social consequences for the child and their caregivers. A lower quality of life has been reported for children with NE compared to controls and NE can influence relationships with friends and family [608-611]. Therefore, treatment is advised from the age of six to seven years onwards considering mental status, family expectations, social issues, and cultural background. There is a clear hereditary factor in NE. If none of the parents or their immediate relatives has suffered from bedwetting, the child has a 15% chance of wetting its bed. If one of the parents, or their immediate relatives have suffered from bedwetting, the chance of bedwetting increases to 44%, and if both parents have a positive history the chance increases to 77%. However, from a genetic point of view, enuresis is a complex and heterogeneous disorder. Loci have been described on chromosomes 12, 13 and 22 [606]. Children with NE are considered deep but poor sleepers due to high arousal thresholds and frequently disturbed sleep. High arousal threshold is the most important pathophysiological factor in the aetiology of NE: the child does not wake up when the bladder is full. Full night polysomnographic recordings support this hypothesis by demonstrating the disruption of children’s sleep microstructure [612]. In addition to the high arousal threshold, there needs to be an imbalance between night-time urine output and night-time bladder capacity [579,605,606]. Recently, attention has been given to the chronobiology of micturition in which the existence of a circadian clock in kidney, brain and bladder is postulated [613]. A high incidence of comorbidity and correlation between nocturnal urine production and sleep disordered breathing, such as obstructive sleep apnoea, has been found and investigated [614]. Symptoms such as habitual snoring, apnoeas, excessive sweating at night and mouth breathing in the patient history or via sleep questionnaires, such as the BEARS questionnaire [615], can lead to the detection of sleep disorders and/or adenotonsillar hypertrophy. When present, a consultation with the ENT specialist can be considered [616]. Obesity is associated with a higher incidence of NE and a lower efficacy for treatment [617]. The presence of allergic diseases has been recognised as a risk factor of NE and with a greater risk for more allergic episodes [618-620]. It is important to consider the child’s and family’s psychological status as primary NE has been associated with psychopathology, such as Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and depressive symptoms [621,622]. In children with ADHD symptoms of NE are more severe and it is important to inform the child and the parents about a delayed success rate and higher relapse rate compared to children without ADHD [623]. 3.12.2. Diagnostic evaluation The diagnosis is mainly obtained by history-taking. Focused questions to differentiate monosymptomatic vs. non-monosymptomatic, primary vs. secondary, comorbid factors such as behavioural or psychological problems and sleep disorder breathing, should be asked. In addition, a two-day complete micturition and drinking diary, which records day-time bladder function and drinking habits will further exclude comorbid factors such as LUTS and polydipsia. Specific attention should be made regarding bowel movements as irregular bowel movements can change the diagnosis from monosymptomatic NE to non-monosymptomatic NE. If constipation or faecal incontinence is found (it is reported in up to 20% of children with NE), it should be treated simultaneously, and the family should be informed that constipation can negatively influence treatment outcomes [624,625]. The night-time urine production should be registered by weighing the night-time diapers in the morning and adding the first morning voided volume [626]. The night-time urine production should be recorded over (at least) a two-week period to diagnose an eventual differentiation between a high night-time production (more than 130% of the age expected bladder capacity) vs. a night-time OAB. A physical examination should be performed with special attention to the back of the child (to exclude any neurological problem), the external genitalia and surrounding skin, as well as to the condition of the clothes (wet underwear or encopresis). Urine analysis is indicated if there is a sudden onset of bedwetting, a suspicion or history of UTIs, or inexplicable polydipsia. A uroflowmetry and US is indicated only if there is a history of previous urethral or bladder surgery and presence of daytime urinary symptoms. For further evaluation, see Section 3.10 on Day-time LUT conditions. There is no clinical indication nor use for a functional MRI (fMRI) in the diagnostic of NE. Research is ongoing, however one of the main issues is the fact that the MRI is performed in an awake state, whereas the NE is a solely event during sleep. The use of fMRI in the elucidation of the NE’s neuropathological mechanisms has not yet been fruitful [627,628]. 3.12.3. Management Before introducing any form of possible treatment, it is of utmost importance to explain the bedwetting condition to the child and the caregivers in order to demystify the problem. Parents should be encouraged to seek medical attention for their bedwetting children and be informed that it is known that the quality of life of parents with a child with NE is negatively impaired. Medical providers assisting families with a child must be aware of this fact and therefore guide parents, by explaining that the key role for treating a child with NE is the ability to understand and the co-operation of the child itself [629]. Since the COVID-19 pandemic situation and promotion of virtual contacts between doctors and patients, it has been shown that telemedicine is a good method of closely follow-up and can be used for follow-up after treatment [630]. 3.12.3.1. Supportive treatment measures Initially, supportive measures including normal and regular eating and drinking habits should be reviewed, stressing normal fluid intake during the day and reducing fluid intake in the hours before sleep. Keeping a chart depicting wet and dry nights, also called as basic bladder advice, has not been shown to be successful in the early treatment of NE [631]. To assure good sleep quality, specifically in children with NE, it is also recommended to limit the use of electronic devices before bedtime [632]. Referral for psychological support should be advised and followed-up for patients with NE and their families, especially if the NE comorbid factor is developmental, attention or learning difficulties, family problems, parental distress and possible punishment of the child are observed. Parental stress levels are higher compared to parents of non-NE children [633] and anger is found to be the most common parental reaction towards NE children [634], this would explain why childhood traumas such as neglect and abuse are more often seen in children with NE [635]. Psychological interventions with parents of NE children were shown to significantly improve their coping mechanisms [636]. 3.12.3.2. Wetting alarm treatment The nocturnal alarm treatment relies on the use of a device that is activated by getting wet. The goal of this therapeutic approach is that the child wakes up by the alarm, which can be acoustic or tactile, either by itself or with the help of a caregiver. Their method of action is to repeat the awakening and therefore change the high arousal to a low arousal threshold, specifically when a status of full bladder is reached. In the most recent Cochrane review (even though the quality of the included studies was low), several studies have shown that alarm treatment will reduce the number of wet nights a week. An alarm treatment has a higher complete response rate and a low relapse rate compared to no treatment at all [637]. In the event of relapse after initial success, one should actively investigate for OAB [638]. The recommended length of therapy with the alarm treatment continues to be uncertain, varying from 8-12 weeks (ICCS) to 16-20 weeks [639]. Regular follow-up will improve the success. It is of utmost importance that the child plays an active role in the alarm treatment, is willing to continue and understand the purpose of the treatment modality. 3.12.3.3. Medical treatment If the child and the family would like to act on the high night-time urine production and eventual night-time OAB, they should be able and willing to adjust their drinking habits and take either desmopressin or a combination of desmopressin and an anticholinergic drug. Success rates of 70% can be obtained with Desmopressin , either as tablets (200-400 μg), or as sublingual Desmopressin oral lyophilisate (120-240 μg). A rare side-effect is water intoxication which can be prevented by adequate water intake. The dosage of 120 ug has been shown to be effective and safe [640]. A structured titration increase up to 240 ug has been shown to be effective [641]. Predictive factors for success with Desmopressin have been identified: older children, in children with fewer wet nights and high night-time urine production [642]. Children that show a good response on low-dose Desmopressin are more likely to show a complete response during the maintenance period [643]. When poor responses are seen on Desmopressin be aware of low compliance [644]. Relapse rates can be high after Desmopressin discontinuation [579], it is unclear if structured withdrawal will result in lower relapse rates [645,646]. A nasal spray is no longer recommended due to the increased risk of overdose [647]. In the event of Desmopressin-resistant treatment for NE or if a suspicion exists for night-time OAB, combination of Desmopressin with anticholinergics is safe and efficient, even after cessation of treatment [648-651]. With night-time OAB a treatment failure to Desmopressin can be explained because of the bladder reservoir dysfunction [652]. There is no indication for monotherapy with an anticholinergic drug [653]. Alarm and Desmopressin treatment have comparable efficacy in achieving >50% reduction in wet nights. Alarms offer superior treatment response (OR: 2.89, 95% CI 1.38 to 6.04) and lower relapse rates (OR: 0.25, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.50) in children [654]. Multimodal treatment can achieve a partial or full response in 80% of children. However, side effects are seen in up to 30% of children [655]. 3.12.3.4. Electrical neuromodulation Several systematic reviews and randomized trials have documented potential benefits of electrical neural stimulation for NE. However, the quality of the included studies was low and different types of electrical neural stimulation, such as intra-anal stimulation and interferential current stimulation have been included [656-659]. The one RCT that compares transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation to placebo demonstrates no anti-enuretic effect [660]. 3.12.3.5. Complementary treatments: A Cochrane review showed no benefit for treatments such as hypnosis, psychotherapy, acupuncture, chiropractic and medicinal herbs for the treatment of NE [661]. 3.12.3.6. Conservative “wait and see” approach If the child and its family is unable to comply with a treatment, if the treatment options are not possible for the family situation, and if there is no social pressure, a “wait and see” approach can be chosen. However, in this approach, it is important to emphasise the fact that the child should wear diapers at night to ensure a normal quality of sleep [662]. The success rate of wait and see is 15% per year, independent of age. Figure 6 presents stepwise assessment and management options for NE. Figure 7: A stepwise assessment and management options for NEENT = ear, nose and throat. 3.12.4.Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of monosymptomatic enuresis Summary of evidenceLEChronobiology of micturition, in which the existence of a circadian clock has been proven in kidney, brain and bladder, and disturbances in this chronobiology play a major role in the pathophysiology of enuresis.1 RecommendationsLEStrength ratingDo not treat children less than five years of age in whom spontaneous cure is likely, but inform the family about the involuntary nature, the high incidence of spontaneous resolution and the fact that punishment will not help to improve the condition.2StrongUse micturition diaries or questionnaires to exclude day-time symptoms.2StrongPerform a urine test to exclude the presence of infection or potential causes such as diabetes insipidus.2StrongOffer supportive measures in conjunction with other treatment modalities, of which pharmacological and alarm treatment are the two most important.1StrongOffer desmopressin in proven night-time polyuria.1StrongOffer alarm treatment in motivated and compliant families.1Strong 