3.14. Dilatation of the upper urinary tract (UPJ and UVJ obstruction). 3.14.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Dilatation of the upper urinary tract (UUT) remains a significant clinical challenge in deciding which patient will benefit from treatment. Ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction is defined as impaired urine flow from the pelvis into the proximal ureter with subsequent dilatation of the collecting system and the potential to damage the kidney. It is the most common pathological cause of neonatal hydronephrosis [886]. It has an overall incidence of 1:1,500 and a ratio of males to females of 2:1 in newborns. Ureterovesical junction (UVJ) obstruction is an obstructive condition of the distal ureter as it enters the bladder, commonly called a primary obstructive megaureter. Megaureters are the second most likely cause of pathological neonatal hydronephrosis. They occur more often in males and are more likely to occur on the left side [887]. It can be very difficult to define ‘obstruction’ as there is no clear division between ‘obstructed’ and ‘non-obstructed’ urinary tracts. Currently, the most popular definition is that an obstruction represents any restriction to urinary outflow that, if left untreated, will cause progressive renal deterioration [888]. 3.14.2. Diagnostic evaluation The widespread use of US during pregnancy has resulted in a higher detection rate for antenatal hydronephrosis [889]. The challenge in the management of dilated UUT is to decide which child should be observed, which should be managed medically, and which requires surgical intervention. Despite the wide range of diagnostic tests, there is no single test that can accurately distinguish obstructive from non-obstructive cases (see Figure 10). 3.14.2.1. Antenatal ultrasound Usually between the 16th and 18th weeks of pregnancy, the kidneys are visualised routinely, when almost all amniotic fluid consists of urine. The most sensitive time for foetal urinary tract evaluation is the 28th week. If dilatation is detected, US should focus on: laterality, severity of dilatation, and echogenicity of the kidneys;hydronephrosis or hydro-ureteronephrosis;bladder volume and bladder emptying;sex of the child;amniotic fluid volume [890]. 3.14.2.2. Postnatal ultrasound Since transitory neonatal dehydration lasts about 48 hours after birth, imaging should be performed following this period of postnatal oliguria. However, in severe cases (bilateral dilatation, solitary kidney, oligohydramnios), immediate postnatal sonography is recommended [891]. Ultrasound should assess the anteroposterior diameter of the renal pelvis, calyceal dilatation, kidney size, thickness of the parenchyma, cortical echogenicity, ureters, bladder wall and residual urine. 3.14.2.3. Voiding cystourethrogram In newborns with identified UUT dilatation, the primary or important associated factors that must be detected include: vesicoureteral reflux (found in up to 25% of affected children) [892];urethral valves;ureteroceles;diverticula;neurogenic bladder. Conventional VCUG is the method of choice for primary diagnostic procedures [893]. 3.14.2.4.Diuretic renography Diuretic renography is the most commonly used diagnostic tool to detect the severity and functional significance of problems with urine transport. Technetium-99m (99mTc) mercaptoacetyltriglycine (MAG3) is the radionuclide of choice. It is important to perform the study under standardised circumstances (hydration, transurethral catheter) after the fourth and sixth weeks of life [894]. Oral fluid intake is encouraged prior to the examination. At fifteen minutes before the injection of the radionuclide, it is mandatory to administer normal saline intravenous infusion at a rate of 15 mL/kg over 30 minutes, with a subsequent maintenance rate of 4 mL/ kg/h throughout the entire time of the investigation [895]. The recommended dose of furosemide is 1 mg/kg for infants during the first year of life, while 0.5 mg/kg should be given to children aged one to sixteen years, up to a maximum dose of 40 mg. Figure 10: Diagnostic algorithm for dilatation of the upper urinary tract* A diagnostic work-up including VCUG must be discussed with the caregivers, as it is possible that, even if reflux is detected, it may have absolutely no clinical impact. However, it should be borne in mind that reflux has been detected in up to 25% of cases of prenatally detected and postnatally confirmed hydronephrosis [803]. US = ultrasound. 3.14.3. Management 3.14.3.1. Prenatal management Counselling the caregivers of an affected child is one of the most important aspects of care. The prognosis is hopeful for a hydronephrotic kidney, even if it is severely affected, as it may still be capable of meaningful renal function, unlike a severely hypoplastic and dysplastic kidney. It is important to be able to tell the caregivers exactly when they will have a definitive diagnosis for their child and what this diagnosis will mean. In some cases, however, it will be immediately obvious that the child is severely affected; there will be evidence of massive bilateral dilatation, bilateral hypoplastic dysplasia, progressive bilateral dilatation with oligohydramnios, and pulmonary hypoplasia. Intrauterine intervention is rarely indicated and should only be performed in well-experienced centres [896]. 3.14.3.1.1. Antibiotic prophylaxis for antenatal hydronephrosis The benefits and harms of continous antibiotic prophylaxis (CAP) vs. observation in patients with antenatal hydronephrosis are controversial. Currently, only two RCTs have been published, one of which is a pilot trial [897] and the other publication is only available as a congress abstract [898]. Both publications present incomplete data and outcomes. The Panel conducted a SR assessing the literature from 1980 onwards [899]. The key findings are summarised below. Due to the heterogeneity of the published literature it was not possible to draw strong conclusions as to whether CAP is superior to observation alone in children diagnosed with antibiotic prophylaxis for antenatal hydronephrosis (ANH). In the first RCT, a prospective longitudinal study [897], female gender, uncircumcised males, lack of CAP, high-grade hydronephrosis, hydroureteronephrosis and VUR were found to be the independent predictors for the development of UTI. The second RCT included in the SR, was published as an abstract only, presented limited data [898]. This trial seemed to focus mainly on patients with ANH and VUR and did not report any beneficial effect of CAP on UTI rates, but details on the study population were limited. Key findings of the SR are that CAP may or may not be superior to observation in children with antenatal hydronephrosis in terms of decreasing UTI. Due to the low data quality it was also not possible to establish whether boys or girls are at a greater risk of developing a UTI, or ascertain whether the presence or absence of VUR impacts UTI rates. A correlation between VUR-grade and UTI could not be established either. However, noncircumcised infants, children diagnosed with high-grade hydronephrosis and hydroureteronephrosis were shown to be at higher risk of developing a UTI. The SR also tried to identify the most effective antibiotic regimen and present data on adverse effects but, due to heterogeneity, the available data could not be statistically compared. The most commonly used antibiotic in infants with antenatal hydronephrosis is trimethoprim, but only one study reported side effects [897]. In conclusion, based on the available evidence, the benefits and harms of CAP in children with antenatal hydronephrosis remain unproven. Uncircumcised infants and infants with hydroureteronephrosis and highgrade hydronephrosis are more likely to develop a UTI. Continuous antibiotic prophylaxis should be reserved for this sub-group of children who are proven to be at high risk. 3.14.3.2. UPJ obstruction It is most important that management decisions are made on the basis of serial investigations that have used the same technique and have been performed by the same institution under standardised circumstances. According to a Cochrane review, non-surgical management of unilateral UPJ obstruction in infants less than two years old is also an option. However the high risk of bias of the included studies limits the evidence of this systematic review [900]. Symptomatic obstruction (recurrent flank pain, UTI) requires surgical correction using a pyeloplasty, according to the standardised open technique of Hynes and Anderson [901]. In experienced hands, laparoscopic or retroperitoneoscopic techniques and robot-assisted techniques have the same success rates as standard open procedures. In asymptomatic cases, conservative follow-up is the treatment of choice. A recent interventional study suggested that, in operated infants less than six months, inserting a stent (transanastomotic stent) decreases the complication rates compared to stentless approach [902]. However the results should be taken cautiously since there are successful reported stentless procedures in other age groups. Indications for surgical intervention comprise impaired split renal function (< 40%), a decrease of split renal function of > 10% in subsequent studies, poor drainage function after the administration of furosemide, increased anteroposterior diameter on US, and grade III and IV dilatation as defined by the Society for Fetal Urology [691]. Well-established benefits of conventional laparoscopy over open surgery are the decreased length of hospital stay, better cosmesis, less post-operative pain and early recovery [903,904]. A recent meta-analysis in children has shown that laparoscopic pyeloplasty (LP) was associated with decreased length of hospital stay and complication rates but prolonged operative time when compared to open pyeloplasty (OP). Additionally, both LP and OP had equal success rates [905]. Laparoscopic pyeloplasty can also be performed for re-do cases with the same advantages of the primary cases [906]. Robotic-assisted laparoscopic pyeloplasty (RALP) has all the same advantages as LP plus better manoeuvrability, improved vision, ease in suturing and increased ergonomics but higher costs [907,908]. A recent study comparing RALP and LP has shown similar postoperative outcomes with exception of decreased operative time for RALP [909]. There does not seem to be any clear benefit of minimal invasive procedures in a very young child but current data is insufficient to defer a cut-off age. 3.14.3.3. Megaureter The treatment options of secondary megaureters are reviewed in Chapter 3.15.3. 3.14.3.3.1. Non-operative management If a functional study reveals and confirms adequate ureteral drainage, conservative management is the best option. Initially, low-dose prophylactic antibiotics within the first year of life are recommended for the prevention of UTIs, although there are no existing prospective randomised trials evaluating the benefit of this regimen [910]. With spontaneous remission rates of up to 85% in primary megaureter cases, surgical management is no longer recommended, except for megaureters with recurrent UTIs, deterioration of split renal function and significant obstruction [911]. 3.14.3.3.2. Surgical management In general, surgery is indicated for symptomatic children, if there is a drop in function in conservative follow-up and hydroureteronephrosis is increasing [912]. Data suggest that children with a ureteric diameter of > 10-15 mm are more likely to require intervention [913]. The initial approach to the ureter can be either intravesical, extravesical or combined. Straightening the ureter is necessary without devascularisation. Ureteral tapering should enhance urinary flow into the bladder. The ureter must be tapered to achieve a diameter for an anti-reflux repair. Several tailoring techniques exist, such as ureteral imbrication or excisional tapering [914]. Some institutions perform endoscopic stenting, but there are still no long-term data and no prospective randomised trials to confirm their outcome. A systematic review assessed the success rates of endoscopic management of primary obstructive megaureters [915]. It was reported that endoscopic managements including; stent placement, balloon dilatation and incision can be an alternative treatment in patients > 1 years of age. One third of those patients required further surgical correction. Furthermore, the long-term outcome of endoscopic management is still unknown. Therefore the EAU Paediatric Urology Guidelines Panel can not recommend endoscopic management routinely since the type of intervention and the management outcomes are unclear. 3.14.4. Conclusion The use of routine perinatal sonography has resulted in increased detection of hydronephrosis caused by UPJ or UVJ obstruction. Meticulous and repeat postnatal evaluation is mandatory to try to identify obstructive cases at risk of renal deterioration and requiring surgical reconstruction. Surgical methods are standardised and have a good clinical outcome. 3.14.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of UPJ-, UVJ-obstruction Summary of evidenceLENowadays, most hydronephrotic kidneys have already been diagnosed prenatally during a maternal US investigation.2Ureteropelvic junction obstruction is the leading pathological cause of hydronephrotic kidneys (40%).1In children diagnosed with antenatal hydronephrosis, a systematic review could not establish any benefits or harms related to continuous antibiotic prophylaxis.1bIn children diagnosed with antenatal hydronephrosis, non-circumcised infants (LE: 1a), children diagnosed with high-grade hydronephrosis (LE: 2) and hydroureteronephrosis (LE: 1b) were shown to be at higher risk of developing UTI.2 RecommendationsLEStrength ratingInclude serial ultrasound (US) and subsequent diuretic renogram and sometimes voiding cystourehrography in postnatal investigations.2StrongOffer continuous antibiotic prophylaxis to the subgroup of children with antenatal hydronephrosis who are at high risk of developing urinary tract infection like uncircumcised infants, children diagnosed with hydroureteronephrosis and high-grade hydronephrosis, respectively.2WeakDecide on surgical intervention based on the time course of the hydronephrosis and the impairment of renal function.2WeakOffer surgical intervention in case of an impaired split renal function due to obstruction or a decrease of split renal function in subsequent studies and increased anteroposterior diameter on the US, and grade IV dilatation as defined by the Society for Fetal Urology.2WeakOffer pyeloplasty when ureteropelvic junction obstruction has been confirmed clinically or with serial imaging studies proving a substantially impaired or decrease in function.2WeakDo not offer surgery as a standard for primary megaureters since the spontaneous remission rates are as high as 85%.2Strong 