3.17. Obstructive pathology of renal duplication: ureterocele and ectopic ureter. 3.17.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Ureterocele and ectopic ureter are the two main anomalies associated with complete renal duplication, but they also occur in a single system. At present, antenatal US detects both conditions in the majority of cases if associated with obstruction, and diagnosis is confirmed after birth by further examination. Later in life, these anomalies are revealed by clinical symptoms: UTI, pain, calculus formation, disturbances of micturition, and urinary incontinence. There is a wide variation of symptoms in patients with ureterocele (from the asymptomatic patient to urosepsis, urinary retention and upper tract dilatation after birth). 3.17.1.1. Ureterocele Ureterocele is four to seven times more frequent in female than in male patients; the overall incidence in autopsies is around one in 4,000 children. Around 80% is associated with the upper pole ureter in duplicated systems and 20% in single systems. About 10% of ureteroceles are bilateral [1204]. 3.17.1.2. Ectopic ureter Ectopic ureter is less frequent than ureterocele (10 in 19,046 autopsies), but is also more common in female patients (male to female ratio is 1:5). Some remain asymptomatic, therefore, the true incidence is difficult to determine [1205]. Eighty per cent of ectopic ureters are associated with complete renal duplication; however, in male patients about 50% of ectopic ureters are associated with a single system [1206]. The incidence of ectopic ureter is 3.5% in patients with anorectal malformations [1207]. 3.17.2. Classification systems 3.17.2.1. Ureterocele Ureterocele is a cystic dilatation that develops in the intravesical part of the submucosal ureter. The aetiology remains unclear [1208-1210]. A single-system ureterocele is associated with a kidney with one ureter, and in duplex systems, the ureterocele belongs to the upper pole. Ureteroceles usually cause obstruction of the upper pole, but the degree of obstruction and functional impairment is variable according to the type of ureterocele and upper pole dysplasia. In the orthotopic form, there is often no or only mild obstruction, and frequently the function of the moiety is normal or slightly impaired, and the corresponding ureter may be dilated. Cystic renal dysplasia is also associated with a single system ureterocele [1211]. Vesicoureteral reflux can be observed in 50% on the ipsilateral side and 20% on the contralateral side. Reflux into the ureterocele is uncommon [1212]. In the ectopic form, the upper pole is altered, frequently dysplastic, and hypo-functional or non-functional [1213]. The corresponding ureter is a mega-ureter. In the caeco-ureterocele (see definition below), the upper pole of the renal duplication is dysplastic and non-functional. Histological evaluation demonstrated that the changes represent a process of maldevelopment and may not result from infections or obstruction [1213]. 3.17.2.1.1. Ectopic (extravesical) ureterocele If any portion of the ureterocele extends into the bladder neck or urethra, it is called an ectopic ureterocele. Ectopic ureterocele is the most common form of ureterocele (> 80%). It can be voluminous, dissociating the trigone and slipping into the urethra, and may prolapse through the urethral meatus (caeco-ureterocele). The ureterocele orifice is tight, and located in the bladder itself or below the neck. The ureter corresponding to the lower pole moiety is raised by the ureterocele and is frequently refluxing or compressed by the ureterocele, leading to an obstructive mega-ureter. A contralateral renal duplication is associated with 50% of cases. Occasionally, large ureteroceles are responsible for reflux or obstruction of the contralateral upper tract. 3.17.2.1.2. Orthotopic (intravesical) ureterocele The intravesical or orthotopic ureterocele is completely located in the bladder. Intravesical ureteroceles are mostly combined with a single kidney system and account for about 15% of cases. It is diagnosed more in older children or adults. 3.17.2.2. Ectopic ureter The term ectopic ureter describes a ureter with the orifice located at the bladder neck, in the urethra or outside the urinary tract. The ureter can drain the upper pole of a duplex or single system. There is a fundamental difference between the sexes. In boys, the ectopic orifice is never below the external sphincter. In girls, the ureteral orifice may be located [1214]: in the urethra, from the bladder neck to the meatus (35%);in the vaginal vestibule (34%);in the vagina (25%);in the uterus and Fallopian tube (6%). In boys, the ureteral orifice may be located [1214]: in the posterior urethra (47%);in the prostatic utricle (10%);in the seminal vesicles (33%);in the vas deferens or ejaculatory ducts (10%). 3.17.3. Diagnostic evaluation 3.17.3.1. Ureterocele Prenatal US easily reveals voluminous obstructive ureteroceles [1215]. In cases with a small upper pole or a slightly obstructive ureterocele, prenatal diagnosis is difficult. If prenatal diagnosis is impossible, the following clinical symptoms, besides incidental findings, can reveal the congenital anomaly at birth or later: At birth, a prolapsed and sometimes strangulated ureterocele may be observed in front of the urethral orifice. In a newborn boy, it might cause acute urinary retention, simulating urethral valves.The early symptom of pyelonephritis in either sex may lead to the diagnosis.Later symptoms can include dysuria, recurrent cystitis and urgency. In cases of prenatal diagnosis, at birth US confirms the ureteral dilatation that ends at the upper pole of a renal duplication. It also demonstrates the presence of a ureterocele in the bladder, with a dilated ureter behind the bladder. At this point, it is important to assess the function of the upper pole using nuclear renography of the region of interest. This is best assessed with DMSA, however this requires a careful systematic review of the images [1216]. Magnetic resonance urography may visualise the morphological status of the upper pole and lower moieties and of the contralateral kidney as well as it can detect renal scars [1217,1218]. Using functional MR urography, differential renal function can be assessed with low intra- and interobserver variability [1219]. Based on the prevalence of high-grade reflux, VCUG is mandatory for identifying ipsilateral or contralateral reflux and assessing the degree of intra-urethral prolapse of the ureterocele [1220]. Urethrocystoscopy may reveal the pathology in cases where it is difficult to make the differential diagnosis between ureterocele and ectopic mega-ureter. 3.17.3.2. Ectopic ureter Most of the ectopic mega-ureters are diagnosed primarily by US. In some cases, clinical symptoms can lead to diagnosis: In neonates: dribbling of urine, pyuria, and acute pyelonephritis.In young girls: permanent urinary incontinence besides normal voiding, or significant vaginal discharge as the equivalent of incontinence; an ectopic orifice may be found in the meatal region [1221].In pre-adolescent boys: epididymitis is the usual clinical presentation and the seminal vesicle may be palpable. Ultrasound, radionuclide studies (DMSA, VCUG, MR urography, high-resolution MRI, and cystoscopy) are the diagnostic tools to assess function, to detect reflux and rule out ipsilateral compression of the lower pole and urethral obstruction [1222]. In some cases, the large ectopic ureter presses against the bladder and can look like a pseudo-ureterocele [1223]. Girls who present with life-long minimal urinary incontinence, never being dry, normal bladder function, complete emptying, and normal US are very suspicious for ectopic ureter. This needs to be excluded or confirmed by MRI as it is the most sensitive method [1224]. 3.17.4. Management 3.17.4.1. Ureterocele Management is controversial with a choice between a non-operative approach, endoscopic decompression, ureteral re-implantation, partial nephroureterectomy, or complete primary reconstruction [1225-1230]. The choice of a therapeutic modality depends on the following criteria: clinical status of the patient (e.g. urosepsis); patient age; function of the upper pole; presence of reflux or obstruction of the ipsilateral or contralateral ureter; presence of bladder neck obstruction caused by ureterocele; intravesical or ectopic ureterocele; and caregivers’ and the surgeon’s preferences [1230]. When the diagnosis is made by US, prophylactic antibiotic treatment maybe indicated until a VCUG is performed. 3.17.4.1.1. Early treatment In the presence of febrile infection or obstruction at the bladder neck, immediate endoscopic incision or puncture of the ureterocele is recommended. In a clinically asymptomatic child with a ureterocele and a non or hypofunctional upper pole, without significant obstruction of the lower pole and without bladder outlet obstruction, prophylactic antibiotic treatment is given until follow-up procedures are instigated. Decompression of the dilated system facilitates later reconstructive surgery [1231,1232]. 3.17.4.1.2. Re-evaluation Active surveillance is an option for antenatally detected ureteroceles, but long-term follow-up is necessary [1233]. Conservative treatment may be adopted in asymptomatic patients without any bladder outlet obstruction, severe hydroureteronephrosis of the ureterocele moiety or high-grade (over grade III) reflux [1230,1234]. A meta-analysis showed that, after primary ureterocele-incision, the re-operation rate is higher in those with an ectopic ureterocele compared to those with an intravesical ureterocele [1226]. Secondary surgery is necessary if decompression is not effective, significant reflux is present, or there is obstruction of the ipsi- or contralateral ureters, and/or bladder neck obstruction or retained ureterocele [1235]. Surgery may vary from upper pole nephrectomy to complete unilateral LUT reconstruction [1229,1236-1238]. In an ectopic ureterocele with severe hydroureteronephrosis and without reflux, the primary upper tract approach without endoscopic decompression (partial upper-pole nephroureterectomy, pyelo/ureteropyelo/ureterostomy and upper-pole ureterectomy) has an 80% chance of being the definitive treatment [1230,1239]. Also a LUT approach in those with a poorly or non-functioning upper pole is an option [1240]. Today, despite successful surgery, some authors think, that surgery may not be necessary at all in some patients [1241], as less aggressive surgical treatment and non-operative management over time can achieve the same functional results [1242]. There is emerging evidence on Minimally Invasive surgical approach (laparoscopic and robot assisted) for upper pole nephrectomy with similar operating time to open surgery [1243,1244]. Figure 12: Algorithm for the management of duplex system ureteroceles after the first 3-6 months of life [1245]DSU = duplex system ureterocele; HUN = hydroureteronephrosis; UPPN = upper pole partial nephrectomy; VUR = vesicoureteric reflux to the lower pole. Obstruction is considered to be the presence of non-refluxing dilatation of non-ureterocele-bearing moieties (especially of the lower pole) or of an obstructive drainage pattern on diuretic renography. 3.17.4.2. Ectopic ureter In the majority of cases, the upper pole is dysplastic and poorly functioning. There are a variety of therapeutic options, each with its advantages and disadvantages. In non-functioning moieties with recurrent infections, heminephro-ureterectomy is a definite solution. Ureteral reconstruction (ureteral re-implantation/ ureteroureterostomy/ureteropyelostomy and upper-pole ureterectomy) are other therapeutic options especially in cases in which the upper pole has function worth preserving. These procedures can be performed through an open laparoscopic or robotic assisted approach [1244,1246-1248]. So far there is no superior approach [1249]. In patients with bilateral single ectopic ureters (a very rare condition), an individual approach depending on the sex and renal and bladder function of the patient is necessary. Usually the bladder neck is insufficient in these patients [1250]. 3.17.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of obstructive pathology of renal duplication: ureterocele and ectopic ureter Summary of evidenceLEUreterocele and ectopic ureter are associated with complete renal duplication, but they also occur in a single system.1In most cases, in young children (first years of life) diagnosis is done by US.1In older children clinical symptoms will prompt assessment.1Management includes a conservative approach, endoscopic decompression, partial nephroureterectomy, or complete primary reconstruction. Choice of treatment will depend on:clinical status of the patient (e.g., urosepsis);patient age;function of the upper pole;presence of reflux or obstruction of the ipsilateral or contralateral ureter;presence of bladder neck obstruction caused by ureterocele;intravesical or ectopic ureterocele.3 RecommendationsLEStrength ratingUreteroceleDiagnosisUse ultrasound (US), radionuclide studies(mercaptoacetyltriglycine (MAG3)/dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA)), voiding cystourethrography (VCUG),magnetic resonance urography, high-resolutionmagnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and cystoscopy to assess function, to detect reflux and rule out ipsilateral compression of the lower pole and urethral obstruction.3WeakTreatmentSelect treatment based on symptoms, function and reflux as well on surgical and parenteral choices: observation, endoscopic decompression, ureteral re-implantation, partial nephroureteretomy, completeprimary reconstruction. Offer, early endoscopic decompression to patients with an obstructing ureterocele.3WeakEctopic ureterDiagnosisUse US, DMSA scan, VCUG or MRI for a definitive diagnosis.3WeakTreatmentTreatment In non-functioning moieties withrecurrent infections, heminephro-ureterectomy is a definitive solution. Ureteral reconstruction (ureteral re-implantation/ureteroureterostomy/ureteropyelostomy and upper pole ureterectomy) are other therapeutic option especially in cases in which the upper pole has function worth preserving.3Weak 