3.21. Emergencies in Paediatric Urology. 3.21.1. Acute Scrotum Refer to Chapter 3.6 “Acute Scrotum” 3.21.2. Paraphimoasis Refer to Chapter 3.1 “Phimosis and other abnormalities of the penile skin” 3.21.3. Priapism 3.21.3.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Priapism is a prolonged full or partial erection of the penis unrelated to sexual stimuli lasting ≥ 4 hours. Although the prevalence of priapism in children is not well reported in literature, it is considered a rare disease. The most common cause of priapism in children is sickle cell disease (SCD), which accounts for about 65% of all cases, followed by leukemia (10%), trauma (10%), idiopathic (10%) and drugs (5%) [1470]. In patients with SCD, the mean age of the first episode of priapism has been shown to be 15 years old, with 25% presenting prepubertally [1471]. 3.21.3.2. Classification Priapism in children can be divided in four groups: ischaemic (low-flow) priapism, stuttering priapism, non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism, and neonatal priapism. Ischaemic (low-flow, veno-occlusive) priapism is the most common form (95%) in children. It presents as a painful, rigid erection, with decreased or absent intracavernous arterial inflow. This is considered a medical emergency, since a duration of ≥ 4 hours can cause ischaemia within the corpora cavernosa, and eventually irreversible damage, such as smooth muscle necrosis, corporal fibrosis and erectile dysfunction [1472]. Stuttering priapism presents as recurrent, self-limiting prolonged erections, with intervening periods of detumescence. This often precedes an episode of ischaemic (low-flow) priapism [1473]. Non-ischaemic (high-flow, arterial) priapism is a prolonged erection of the penis lasting ≥ 4 hours not associated with ischaemia. The most common cause is penile, perineal or pelvic trauma, which can lead to the development of an arteriolar-sinusoidal or arteriocavernous fistula, and usually has a delayed presentation after trauma (3 hours – 7 days) [1474]. Neonatal priapism is a very rare condition, with only a few case series described in literature. It presents as a prolonged erection of the penis ≥ 4 hours in a new-born. Sickle cell disease is not associated with neonatal priapism due to the presence of foetal haemoglobin. It is most commonly idiopathic, but polycythaemia is the most common cause among the identifiable causes [1475]. It has a favourable natural history and benign pathophysiology. 3.21.3.3. Diagnostic evaluation History A comprehensive history is critical in priapism and can determine the underlying priapism subtype and cause. Key points in the history of a child with priapism are shown in Table 8. Table 8: Key points in the history for a child with priapism (adapted from Broderick et al.) 1476 Duration of erectionPresence and severity of painPrevious episodes of priapism and methods of treatmentMedications or recreational drug useSickle cell disease, haemoglobinopathies, hypercoagulable states, vasculitisTrauma to the pelvis, perineum or penis Physical examination Inspection and palpation of the penis is recommended to assess the degree of tumescence and rigidity and the involvement of the corpora cavernosa, spongiosum and glans. In ischaemic (low-flow) priapism, typically the glans and corpus spongiosum are flaccid. In non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism, typically the corpora and the glans are tumescent but not fully rigid (Table 9). If perineal compression results in detumescence, this is suggestive of a non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism. Penile imaging Color doppler ultrasonography of the penis and perineum should be performed in all patients. This can support clinical differentiation between ischaemic (low-flow) and non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism with 100% sensitivity and 73% specificity in adults [1477], where a peak systolic velocity < 50 cm/s and a mean velocity< 6.5cm/s are suspicious for ischaemia [1478]. Laboratory testing Laboratory testing with complete blood count (white blood cell count with blood cell differential platelet count) and specific tests for SCD or other haemoglobinopathies should be performed. When ischaemic (low-flow) priapism is suspected, penile blood gas analysis should be performed to differentiate between ischaemic (low-flow) and non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism (Table 10). However, when non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism is suspected, penile blood gas analysis should not be the diagnostic of first choice, due to the invasive nature and need for anesthesia. Table 9: Key findings in paediatric priapism (adapted from Donaldson et al., and Broderick et al., [1470,1476]) Ischaemic (low-flow) priapismNon-ischaemic(high-flow) priapismCorpora cavernosa fully rigidTypicallySeldomPenile painTypicallySeldomHistory of stuttering priapismTypicallySeldomHaematological abnormalitiesTypicallySeldomAbnormal penile blood gasTypicallySeldomPerineal traumaSeldomTypically Table 10: Blood gas analysis (adapted from Broderick et al. [1476]) SourcepO2 (mmHg)pCO2 (mmHg)pHNormal arterial blood (room air) (similar valuesare found in non-ischaemic priapism)> 90< 407.40Normal mixed venous blood (room air)40507.35Ischaemic priapism (first corporal aspirate)< 30> 60< 7.25 3.21.3.4. Disease Management Differentiation between ischaemic (low-flow) and non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism is essential, since clinical management differs between the two. Ischaemic (low-flow) priapism is a medical emergency requiring immediate treatment, where non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism does not. The management of a child with ischaemic (low-flow) priapism is on most parts similar to adults [1479]. Ischaemic (low-flow) priapismConservative Although the amount of evidence is low, conservative treatment should be advised (e.g., physical exercise, urination, cold bath, ejaculation, oral/IV fluids, and analgesia), however if symptoms persist ≥ 2 hours, urgent medical care should be sought [1480]. Medical If conservative treatment fails, a step-up approach should be used for the management of priapism [1470]. Firstly, anesthesia should be given for the child, either local anesthesia, dissociative sedation or general anesthesia, depending on availability of paediatric anaesthetic expertise and the age and condition of the child. In SCD there are increased risks for general anaesthesia which should be taken into account [1481]. Subsequently a step-up approach should be used for treatment (Figure 14), adapted from Donaldson and adult priapism guideline [1470,1479]. Figure 14: Step-up approach for the management of Ischaemic (low-flow) priapism in children  Non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism  This is a very rare entity in the paediatric population. The treatment of non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism is not emergent. One study demonstrated that conservative management and long-term follow-up yielded no evidence of erectile dysfunction after a median follow-up of 55 months [1482]. Conservative treatment, such as perineal compression or application of ice to the perineum can be successful. If symptoms persist, super-selective angio-embolisation can be performed, however this is technically challenging in children and requires a specialist paediatric vascular radiologist [1483]. Children should be initially treated with a conservative management, reserving embolization for refractory cases [1484]. Stuttering Priapism, and Priapism associated with Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) The management of a prolonged erection in stuttering priapism is similar to ischaemic (low-flow) priapism. Further management should focus on the prevention of further episodes. Several agents are proposed in literature, such as α-adrenergic agonists, PDE-5 inhibitors, hydroxyurea, β-agonists, or gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists, but evidence is limited. The acute management of SCD priapism is closely related to that outlined above. The main caveat is that those with SCD should have their disease medically optimized in close conjunction with paediatric haematology/oncology through a multidisciplinary approach. Hydroxyurea may decrease crisis frequency and severity in SCD-associated priapism [1485]. Unlike urgent surgical management performed in the adult population, a minimally invasive management strategy can be implemented in the paediatric population where an extended period of conservative management that avoids operative management under general anesthetic can be effective in about 60% cases [1486]. Neonatal priapism Neonatal priapism is usually self-limiting and rarely requires treatment. Careful observation is appropriate in most cases since the majority resolves spontaneously without sequelae. If underlying polycythemia is present, this could be treated by venesection and fluid resuscitation [1487]. 3.21.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnosis and management of Priapism Summary of evidenceLEThe most common cause of priapism in children is sickle cell disease.3Ischaemic (low-flow, veno-occlusive) priapism is the most common form (95%) in children and is considered a medical emergency.3Color doppler ultrasonography of the penis and perineum can support clinical differentiation between ischaemic (low-flow) and non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism in children.2b  RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform a doppler ultrasonography in all patients presenting with priapism.StrongIn children with ischaemic (low-flow) priapism, perform a full blood count and haemoglobinopathy screen to exclude sickle cell disease or other haematological disorders.StrongAdopt a multidisciplinary approach when managing patients with SCD-associated priapism.StrongUse a step-wise approach starting with the least invasive therapy in patients with ischaemic (low-flow) priapism.StrongManage neonatal and non-ischaemic (high-flow) priapism conservatively in the initial management period.Strong Stones Refer to Chapter 3.16 “Urinary stone disease” 