3.24. Basic principles of laparoscopic surgery in children. 3.24.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology The use of laparoscopy and robot-assisted laparoscopic surgery is rapidly increasing and has gained widespread acceptance for many urological surgeries in children [1585]. Laparoscopy is commonly performed for non-palpable testis, nephrectomy, heminephrectomy, varicocelectomy, pyeloplasty, ureteral reimplantation. This expanding scope related to technological advancements allows surgeons to perform more complex procedures in a minimally invasive fashion even in infants and younger children. Generally, well established benefits of minimally invasive surgery are decreased pain, shorter convalescence and better cosmetics compared to traditional open surgery [907,1586]. When comparing the transperitoneal and retroperitoneal approach, there was no difference in recovery of bowel function [1587]. Additional advantages of robotic surgery over conventional laparoscopy include ergonomics, 3D vision, better manoeuvrability, decreased tremor and easy learning curve. Limitations to be considered are increased operative time, smaller working space at young age, cost and experience of the surgeon and anaesthesiologist. While the success and complication rates are comparable for nephrectomy and pyeloplasty advantages of laparoscopy and robotic surgery for ureteral reimplantation have not been proven and this can only be recommended for experienced centres. As worldwide experience increases, there is an accumulating awareness about the physiological consequences related to intra- and retroperitoneal CO2 insufflation in children. In contrast to traditional open surgery pneumoperitoneum may have physiological responses which require close monitoring during surgery and should be taken seriously. 3.24.2. Technical considerations and physiological consequences 3.24.2.1. Pre-operative evaluation Laparoscopy in children requires specific anaesthetic precautions. Physiological effects of CO2 pneumoperitoneum, positioning of the patient and in potentially increased operative time need to be considered by the anaesthesiology team. Therefore, a detailed medical examination and risk assessment is mandatory pre-operatively. Especially the cardiac and pulmonary system should be assessed since increased intra-abdominal pressure may lead to decreased ventricular preload [1588]. 3.24.2.2. Abdominal insufflation Abdominal insufflation is the main principle of laparoscopic surgery to create working space for the surgeon. Carbon dioxide is most commonly used for insufflation in laparoscopic centres throughout the world. Other alternatives reported are nitrous oxide, helium, argon and air. However, CO2 is considered to be the best available gas as it is colourless, cheap, has high solubility in the vascular system [1589] and is excreted by the pulmonary system making it the safest option. Smaller children and infants absorb more CO2 than older children [1590], suggesting the need for more attention both during and early after laparoscopic surgery for these children. Most complications of laparoscopy are attributable to gaining access to the abdominal cavity. One study reporting complications of > 5,400 paediatric laparoscopic surgeries showed that there was an overall complication rate of 5.3% of which 4.2% were related to problematic insufflation (subcutaneous emphysema, gas embolism, injury to the organs and vascular structures, mis-insufflation etc.) [1591]. There are two main and well-established techniques for initial access to the abdomen or retroperitoneum: open technique (Hasson) and Veress needle. Studies comparing these two different access techniques in paediatric laparoscopic urological procedures showed similar complication rates [1592]. The vast majority of the complications were minor and related to lack of surgical experience. Particularly in infants and smaller children, the open access technique is recommended by the Panel to reduce the chance of complications. Elasticity of the abdominal wall is age-related and is higher in infants and small children compared to older children [1593]. Pneumoperitoneal pressure (PnP in mmHg) is one of the critical points that needs to be carefully considered by laparoscopic surgeons. An RCT compared two different pneumoperitoneal pressure groups (6-8 mmHg vs. 9-10 mmHg) in infants less than 10 kg [1594]. It demonstrated that higher pressures were associated with more pronounced respiratory and haemodynamic changes as well as increased post-operative pain scores and prolonged time to resume feeding. 3.24.2.3. Pulmonary effects After intra-abdominal insufflation the diaphragm is pushed upwards due to increased abdominal pressure. This leads to decreased total pulmonary compliance. Combined with CO2 absorption this may lead to hypercarbia and acidosis, particularly in case of prolonged operative time or low pulmonary reserve such as in infants. Trendelenburg position may also aggravate the situation in operations in the pelvic region, such as anti-reflux or bladder neck surgeries. Several studies revealed increased end tidal CO2 (ET CO2) related to CO2 absorption [1590,1595,1596]. One study showed a 33% increase in ET CO2 in the majority of neonatal laparoscopic and thoracoscopic procedures [1597]. Shorter operative time and lower intra-abdominal pressures decrease the risk of increased ET CO2. Hypoxemia is rarely seen, even in neonates and can easily be adjusted by increasing minute ventilation. These findings highlight the importance of close monitoring of the children. 3.24.2.4. Cardiovascular effects Intra-abdominal pressure, CO2 absorption and positioning may also affect the cardiovascular system. It has been shown in adults that after initiation of pneumoperitoneum, cardiac output and stroke volume decrease while mean arterial pressure, central venous pressure and systemic vascular resistance increase [1598]. Similar outcomes have been reported during paediatric laparoscopy with some nuances. Cardiac output was 30% decreased while blood pressure remained stable during laparoscopic orchidopexy with PnP of 10 mmHg in children between aged 6-30 months [1599]. When PnP was lowered from 12 mmHg to 6 mmHg, cardiac index and other vascular parameters normalised [1600]. Using high intra-abdominal pressures in infants with congenital cardiac abnormalities may result in re-opening of cardiac shunts such as the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus [1601]. Although cardiovascular effects of using high PnP are clinically measurable, they may not have a significant clinical impact on healthy children. However, it is clear that using lower pressures is safer especially in smaller children. 3.24.2.5. Effects on renal function A study measuring renal oxygenation with NIRS (Near-infrared spectroscopy) during laparoscopy showed that pneumoperitoneum might have a negative effect on renal oxygenation [1602]. However, this effect was reversible after desufflation. Other studies showed pneumoperitoneum may also have adverse effects on renal blood flow [1603]. High intra-abdominal pressures and reverse Trendelenburg position may cause decreased glomerular filtration rate and decreased urine output. One study has shown that 88% of infants and 14% of children more than one year old develop anuria within 45 minutes after initiation of PnP with 8 mmHg [1604]. However, urine output recovers with temporary polyuria after the operation. Although the clinical relevance of decreased urine output seems insignificant, it is important to monitor the fluid and electrolyte balance of the children during and after laparoscopic surgery. 3.24.2.6. Effects on neurological system Another effect of pneumoperitoneum is increased intracranial pressure (ICP) which normalises after desufflation of the abdomen [1605]. Trendelenburg position, high PnP and hypoventilation are additional risk factors for increased ICP. Laparoscopy is therefore contraindicated in patients with intracranial space occupying lesions [1606]. Children with ventriculo-peritoneal shunts require precautions with regards to shunt drainage, however laparoscopy is not contraindicated [1607]. 3.24.2.7. Comparison of robot-assisted laparoscopic surgery versus laparoscopic surgery No physiological differences are expected between the two approaches since pneumoperitoneum needs to be achieved in the same manner. However, a systematic review comparing robot-assisted laparoscopic pyeloplasty to conventional laparoscopy in infants and children showed no differences in terms of operative success and redo rates between the two techniques [1608]. As for operative time, hospital length of stay and complication rates, the robotic approach appears to be slightly superior in children [909,1609]. However, in the infant population, operative time was longer in the robot-assisted approach as compared to conventional laparoscopy and there was a higher complication rate, mainly due to a higher rate of port-site hernias [1610]. The robot-assisted approach might aid in filling the gap to minimally invasive surgery for paediatric urologists as it has a shorter learning curve and does not necessarily require prior laparoscopic experience. Downsides to the robotic approach are the size of the instruments, accessibility and costs [909,1608]. 3.24.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for laparoscopy in children Summary of evidenceLELaparoscopy and robotic-assisted laparoscopic surgery can safely be performed in children1The general benefits of laparoscopy are decreased pain, shorter convalescence and better cosmetics compared to traditional open surgery.1Limitations to be considered are increased operative time, smaller working space with young age, cost, surgeon and anaesthesiologist experience.1Pneumoperitoneum may have physiological effects which require close monitoring during surgery and should be taken seriously.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingUse lower intra-abdominal pressure (6-8 mmHg) during laparoscopic surgery in infants and smaller children.StrongUse open access for laparoscopy in infants and smaller children.StrongMonitor for laparoscopy-related cardiac, pulmonary and diuretic responses.Strong 