3.3. Testicular Tumours in prepubertal boys. 3.3.1. Introduction Testicular tumours account for approximately 1-2% of all paediatric solid tumours [124]. Testicular tumours in prepubertal boys differ in several aspects to testicular tumours in adolescent and adult men: they have a lower incidence, they have a different histologic distribution (teratomas and yolk sac tumours are more common and germ cell tumours are less common) and they are more often benign. A epidemiological study showed that in children under the age of 15 years the incidence is highest in Asia (4.2 per million) and South America (5 per million) and lowest in Europe (2.1 per million) and North America (2.5 per million). This is in contrast to the incidence in adolescent and young adults where the highest incidence is in Europe (137.4 per million), and North America (94.9 per million), while a lower incidence was observed in South and Central America (66.5 per million) and Asia (27.1 per million) [125]. For age distribution in prepubertal boys, there is a small peak around the age of two years [126]. Some studies demonstrated that up to 60-75% of the tumours are benign [124,127-131]. Intratubular neoplasia (TIN) is practically non-existent in children [132-135]. Testicular tumours can generally be classified as germ cell or stromal tumours. One specific tumour type is the gonadoblastoma, which contains germ cell and stromal cell tumour types and will occur almost exclusively in the setting of disorders of sexual differentiation [136]. In the past 30 years, it has clearly been shown, that there is a fundamental difference between testicular tumours in childhood and those in adulthood - not only in terms of the difference and incidence [125] but also in terms of histology [132]. In prepubertal boys, most intratesticular tumours are benign, whereas post puberty the tumours are most likely malignant. 3.3.2. Clinical presentation Clinical presentation is a painless scrotal mass in more than 90% of the patients, detected by the caregiver, physician or the patient himself. A history of a trauma, pain or hernia is rare. A hydrocele can be found in 15 – 50% [128,137]. In boys with early onset of puberty (e.g. early penile and prepubic hair growth) as well as high testosterone and low gonadotropin levels, a Leydig cell tumour should be excluded [138]. In patients presenting with a scrotal mass, paratesticular tumours should also be taken into account as a differential diagnosis. However, these are even less common compared to intratesticular tumours. The spectrum of paratesticular tumours includes benign tumours such as leiomyoma, fibroma, lipoma, haemangioma, cystic lymphangioma and lipoblastoma as well as malignant tumours such as the paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma with an excellent prognosis and the rare melanotic neuroectodermal tumour of infancy with a high recurrence rate [139-142]. As most of them are benign, intra-operative frozen section should be available during surgery. An organ sparing surgical approach is preferred in benign tumours, whereas in malignant tumour standard orchiectomy is carried out. 3.3.3. Evaluation To confirm the diagnosis, a high-resolution US examination (7.5 – 12.5 MHz), preferably a doppler ultrasound, is required. The detection rate is almost 100% [143-146]. With high-resolution US, microlithiasis - small hyperdense areas without sound shadows - is increasingly seen in prepubertal boys. A meta-analysis showed that only 4 out of 296 boys (< 19 years of age diagnosed with microlithiasis) developed a testicular tumour of whom two previously had a testicular tumour on the opposite or ipsilateral site [147]. If microlithiasis shows up in patients with additional risk factors for testicular tumour, then the caregivers/patients should be informed about the increased risk and encouraged to carry out regular self-examinations - similar to patients treated for undescended testis [148]. There is no evidence, that regular sonographic follow-up is useful [147]. The risk for infertility may be higher in patients with microlithiasis and if these patients have any sign of infertility later, the risk of developing a tumour seems to be higher compared to patients without microlithiasis and infertility [149]. Due to the low incidence of a contralateral tumour, even in cases of testicular microlithiasis, there is no indication for contralateral testicular biopsy in prepubertal boys. Age should be taken into account, when tumour markers are used. Human chorionic gonadotropin (ß-hCG) is derived from chorion carcinoma, embryonal carcinoma or seminoma. However, these tumours are extremely rare in prepubertal boys and therefore ß-hCG is not useful in prepubertal boys. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) has a clear limitation of its sensitivity and specificity in the first months of life [137] and sometimes takes up to twelve months before the serum concentration reaches the known standard values (< 10 ng/mL) [131,150]. It is produced by > 90% of yolk sac tumours. Teratomas can also produce AFP, but not to that extent of yolk sac tumours [151]. Alpha-fetoprotein should be measured before any therapeutic intervention (tumour enucleation/orchiectomy) and ideally should be available at the time of the procedure. Alpha-fetoprotein has a serum biological half-life of five days and should be measured five days after tumour resection/orchiectomy in those with an elevated AFP. There is no urgent need for pre-operative staging, as this has no consequence before the definitive histology is available. 3.3.4. Treatment/Management If a testicular tumour is suspected, surgery with the option of intra-operative frozen section should be performed. It is not necessary to do this as an emergency procedure. However, in order to confirm the diagnosis and to avoid familial anxiety, the operation should be scheduled as soon as possible, preferably within the next few days. Organ-preserving surgery should be performed, whenever possible. A review article showed that out of 227 patients with organ-sparing surgery only two cases (one in a patient with an epidermoid cyst and one in a patient with a mature teratoma) had a recurrence [152-154]. Orchiectomy could be considered only if normal testicular parenchyma is no longer detectable in the pre-operatively high-resolution ultrasound and/or the AFP is > 100 ng/mL in a > 12-month-old boy: highly suspicious of a yolk sac tumour. For surgical technique, the Panel is in favour of an inguinal approach. Furthermore, clamping of the vessels has the advantage of a better view, when organ sparing surgery is performed. However, there is no evidence in the literature, that tumour-spread is prevented by clamping the vessels. Whenever possible, testis sparing surgery should be performed along with frozen sections during surgery to confirm the diagnosis (begin vs. malignant tumour) and to confirm if a microscopically margin-negative resection is performed, in which no gross or microscopic tumour remains in the primary tumour bed (R0 resection). In cases of an R0 resection, the tunica is closed and the testis is replaced in the scrotum. In case of R1 resection (removal of all macroscopic disease, but microscopic margins are positive for tumour) confirmed by frozen section in a malignant or potential malignant tumour, an orchiectomy should be performed at the same time of surgery. If the final pathology later demonstrates a R1 resection in a malignant tumour despite intra-operative negative margins on frozen section, an inguinal orchiectomy can safely be performed. In patients with a malignant tumour (yolk sac tumour, immature teratoma) staging should be performed including an MRI of the abdomen and a CT-scan from the chest. If there is any suspicion of a non-organ confined tumour, the patient should be referred to a paediatric oncologist. In patients with the rare diagnosis of a Granulosa cell tumour, imaging of the abdomen to exclude enlarged lymph nodes is reasonable as this may be a potentially malignant tumour; in those with Sertoli or a Leydig cell tumour, an MRI is recommended, as 10% are malignant and the metastases do not respond very well to chemotherapy or radiation in the adult literature [155,156]. The TNM classification from 2015 for adult testicular tumours can be used in patients with a malignant tumour [157]. In benign tumours (mature teratoma, epidermoid cysts) no further staging is required. 3.3.5. Tumour entities in prepubertal boys Teratomas are usually benign in prepubertal children and represent the greatest proportion of intratesticular tumours (around 40%) [124,158]. They present at a median age of 13 months (0-18 months). Only in adolescent and adults, they should be considered as malignant tumours. Histologically they can consist of a combination of the three primitive embryological germ-cell layers (ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm). Most of these elements shows microscopically mature elements [159]; however, some immature teratomas in this age group have also been reported [160]. To exclude any malignant potential, like focal areas of a yolk-sac tumour, the entire specimen should be investigated. On US examination a heterogenous picture with some calcification is seen [161] and AFP should be less than 100 ng/mL in an infant. After organ-sparing surgery only one recurrence was reported in the literature [154]. Epidermoid cysts are of ectodermal origin and seem to be related to well-differentiated teratomas; they are always benign [159]. Keratin-producing epithelium is responsible for the keratinised-squamous-epithelial deposits, which appear hyperechogenic in an US [161]. Organ-sparing surgery should be performed and if confirmed by histology, there is no need for surveillance despite the fact that one “recurrence” has been reported thirteen years after diagnosis [153]. Juvenile granulosa cell tumours occur usually in the first year of life, typically within the first six months [162]. They are well circumscribed and have a typical yellow-tan appearance; 2/3 have cystic elements, 1/3 solid [162]. The stroma can be fibrous or fibromyxoid. So far, no recurrence has been reported after organ-sparing surgery [162,163]. Leydig cell tumours arising from the testosterone producing Leydig cells should be suspected in boys with early onset of puberty with high testosterone and low gonadotropin levels [138]. Patients are usually between six and ten years of age; the tumours are well circumscribed with yellow-brown nodules. In children there are no reports of malignant Leydig cell tumours and after organ sparing surgery, there are no reported recurrences to date [164,165]. In the adult literature, there is a malignancy rate of 10% reported and primary retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy should be discussed in cases with enlarged lymph nodes, as these metastases do not respond very well to chemotherapy or radiation [166]. Around 1/5 of the Sertoli-cell tumours occur in children; usually within the first year of life [167]. In the paediatric age group, the large-cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumours (LCCSCT) are the most common tumour variant [168,169]. They can occur in patients with complex dysplastic syndromes, such as the Carney or Peutz-Jeghers syndrome [169-171]. Except one case report with the histological diagnosis of a malignant LCCSCT [168], all other reported tumours are benign, therefore organ-sparing surgery should be performed. Yolk sac tumours are the predominant prepubertal malignant germ cell tumours and may represent around 15% of the prepubertal tumours in boys [124]. They also have a number of other names: endodermal sinus tumours, juvenile embryonal carcinoma, clear cell carcinoma, orchioblastoma, vitellineum, archenteronoma and sometimes extraembryonal mesoblastoma [172]. They are histologically mostly solid, yellow-grey tumours. They occur usually within the first two years of life [173]. Up to 80-85% of the tumours are organ confined (Stage I) [174]. The tumour usually spreads haematogenously (chest). Twenty percent of those with Stage I disease may develop visible metastasis in 20% within the next two years. In a German study, 14 out of 91 patients with Stage I had a recurrence after observation – all were cured by chemotherapy alone. Four out of five with metastatic disease initially, were cured by chemotherapy after radical orchiectomy [175]. In a published series from China, 21 out of 90 paediatric patients with a Stage I yolk sac tumour received primary chemotherapy. One of the 21 had a recurrence, whereas 29 out of 69 who underwent surveillance after initial orchiectomy had a recurrence. The overall four-year survival rate was 97.8% [173], almost the same recurrence rate has also been reported by American oncology groups [176,177]. Therefore in patients with Stage I disease (no metastatic disease in the MRI-abdomen and CT scan of the chest as well as normal age-adapted AFP values) close follow-up together with the paediatric oncologists including AFP every two to three months and MRI of the abdomen is recommended, at least for the first two to three years [137]. This is especially recommended in those with invasions of the lymphatic vessels, as this has been shown to be a prognostic factor in one of the recent series [173]. In cases of recurrence, chemotherapy should be performed by paediatric oncologists according to national study protocols. 3.3.6. Follow-up Regular US examination is recommended in the follow-up period to detect any recurrence and/or other abnormalities. As there are only a few studies with recurrence after testicular sparing surgery or orchiectomy, no clear recommendation can be made concerning the interval and the duration of follow-up. However, doing an US examination every three to six months within the first year seems reasonable, as few recurrences have been detected at this time and the rate of atrophy is extremely low after organ-sparing surgery [152]. Only in patients with a malignant tumour, regular follow-up examination after the first year of surgery seems reasonable (see above). The follow-up in patients with a Leydig cell tumour should include endocrinological examinations. Using the SEER data base, the five-year relative survival for testicular malignancies for patients < 14 years of age diagnosed with localised testicular cancer was 97.4%, and for those with distant disease 72.6% [178]. 3.3.7. Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Boys with a congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) represent a special group. Up to a third of the patients have so-called testicular adrenal rest tumours (TARTs) This proportion increase with age [179,180]. It is most likely to be ectopic adrenal cells, which are growing under pathological stimulation from Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH) [181]. They have no malignant potential, but they can have a lasting impact on fertility by displacing the normal testicular parenchyma [181,182]. These patients should be offered US screening and advice on fertility with the option of cryopreservation [182]. As far as is known, no malignant tumour has been described in patients with a typical TART. As a result, the indication for surgical intervention in these patients to rule out a malignant tumour should be offered very cautiously. Summary of evidenceLETesticular tumours in prepubertal boys have a lower incidence and a different histologic distribution compared to the adolescent and adult patients.2aIn prepupertal boys up to 60-75% of testicular tumours are benign.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingHigh-resolution ultrasound (7.5 – 12.5 MHz), preferably a doppler ultrasound, should be performed to confirm the diagnosis.StrongAlpha-fetoprotein (AFP) should be determined in prepubertal boys with a testicular tumour before surgery.StrongSurgical exploration should be done with the option for frozen section, but not as an emergency operation.StrongOrgan-preserving surgery should be performed in all benign tumours.StrongStaging (MRI abdomen /CT chest) should only be performed in patients with a malignant tumour to exclude metastases.StrongMagnetic resonance imaging should only be performed in patients with the potential malignant Leydig or Sertoli-cell-tumours to rule out lymph node enlargement.WeakPatients with a non-organ confined tumour should be referred to paediatric oncologists post-operatively.Weak 