3.6. Acute scrotum. 3.6.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Acute scrotum is a paediatric urological emergency, most commonly caused by torsion of the testis or appendix testis, or epididymitis/epididymo-orchitis [232-237]. Other causes of acute scrotal pain are idiopathic scrotal oedema, mumps orchitis, varicocele, scrotal haematoma, incarcerated hernia, appendicitis or systemic disease (e.g. Henoch-Schönlein purpura) [238-250]. Trauma can also be a cause of acute scrotum due to post-traumatic haematomas, testicular contusion, rupture, dislocation or torsion [251-256]. Scrotal fat necrosis has also been reported to be an uncommon cause of mild-to-moderate scrotal pain in pre-pubertal overweight boys after exposure to cold [257]. In this chapter testicular torsion and epididymitis are discussed, while recurrent epididymitis is discussed in the chapter dealing with infections. Torsion of the testis occurs most often in the neonatal period and around puberty, whereas torsion of the appendix testis occurs over a wider age range [258]. Epididymitis affects two age groups: less than one year and twelve to fifteen years [259,260]. One study predicted the annual incidence of epididymitis around 1.2 per 1,000 children [261]. Perinatal torsion of the testis most often occurs prenatally. Bilateral torsion comprises 11-21% of all perinatal cases [262]. Most cases of perinatal torsion are extravaginal, in contrast to the usual intravaginal torsion which occurs during puberty. 3.6.2. Diagnostic evaluation Patients usually present with scrotal pain, except in neonatal torsion. The sudden onset of invalidating pain in combination with vomiting is typical for torsion of the testis or appendix testis [263,264]. In general, the duration of symptoms at presentation is shorter in testicular torsion (69% present within twelve hours) and torsion of the appendix testis (62%) compared to epididymitis (31%) [234,235,260].Prepubertal males are more likely to present with atypical symptoms and delayed presentation and diagnosis, leading to delayed surgical intervention and a higher rate of orchiectomy, compared to postpubertal boys [265]. In the early phase, location of the pain can lead to diagnosis. Patients with acute epididymitis experience a tender epididymis, whereas patients with testicular torsion are more likely to have a tender testicle, in case of torsion of the appendix testis there may be isolated tenderness of the superior pole of the testis [260]. An abnormal (horizontal) position of the testis is more frequent in testicular torsion than epididymitis [234]. Looking for absence of the cremasteric reflex is a simple method with 100% sensitivity and 66% specificity for testicular torsion [259,264] (LE: 3). Elevation of the scrotum may reduce complaints in epididymitis, but not in testicular torsion. Fever occurs more often in epididymitis (11-19%). The classical sign of a “blue dot” was found only in 10-23% of patients with torsion of the appendix testis [233,234,259,266]. In many cases, it is not easy to determine the cause of acute scrotum based on history and physical examination alone [232-237,259,266]. A positive urine culture is only found in a few patients with epididymitis [236,259,266,267]. It should be remembered that a normal urinalysis does not exclude epididymitis. Similarly, an abnormal urinalysis does not exclude testicular torsion. Doppler US is useful to evaluate acute scrotum, with 63.6-100% sensitivity and 97-100% specificity, a positive predictive value of 100% and negative predictive value of 97.5% [268-273] (LE: 3). The use of Doppler US may reduce the number of patients with acute scrotum undergoing scrotal exploration, but it is operator-dependent and can be difficult to perform in pre-pubertal patients [270,274]. It may also show a misleading arterial flow in the early phases of torsion and in partial or intermittent torsion. Of key importance, persistent arterial flow does not exclude testicular torsion. In a multicentre study of 208 boys with torsion of the testis, 24% had normal or increased testicular vascularisation [270]. A comparison with the other side should always be done. Better results were reported using high-resolution US (HRUS) for direct visualisation of the spermatic cord twist with a sensitivity of 97.3% and specificity of 99% [270,275] (LE: 2). A so-called positive whirlpool sign (the presence of a spiral-like pattern), has a pooled sensitivity and specificity of 0.73 (95% CI; 0.65-0.79) and 0.99 (95% CI; 0.92-0.99), respectively, and may be viewed as a definitive sign for testicular torsion. But its role in neonates is limited [276]. Scintigraphy and, more recently, dynamic contrast-enhanced subtraction MRI of the scrotum also provide a comparable sensitivity and specificity to US [277-280]. These investigations may be used when diagnosis is less likely and if torsion of the testis still cannot be excluded from history and physical examination. This should be done without inordinate delays for emergency intervention [266]. The diagnosis of acute epididymitis in boys is mainly based on clinical judgement and adjunctive investigation. However, it should be remembered that findings of secondary inflammatory changes in the absence of evidence of an extra-testicular nodule by Doppler US might suggest an erroneous diagnosis of epididymitis in children with torsion of the appendix testes [281]. Pre-pubertal boys with acute epididymitis have an incidence of underlying urogenital anomalies of 25-27.6%. Complete urological evaluation in all children with acute epididymitis is still debatable [236,259,261]. 3.6.3. Management 3.6.3.1. Epididymitis In pre-pubertal boys, the aetiology is usually unclear, with an underlying pathology in about 25%. A urine culture is usually negative, and unlike in older boys, a sexually transmitted disease is very rare. Antibiotic treatment, although often started, is not indicated in most cases unless urinalysis and urine culture show a bacterial infection [261,282]. Epididymitis is usually self-limiting and with supportive therapy (i.e. minimal physical activity and analgesics) heals without any sequelae (LE: 3). However, bacterial epididymitis can be complicated by abscess or necrotic testis and surgical exploration is required [283]. 3.6.3.2. Testicular torsion Manual detorsion of the testis is done without anaesthesia, and should be attempted in all patients if possible, because it is associated with improved surgical salvage rates [284]. It should initially be done by outward rotation of the testis - like opening a book -, unless the pain increases or if there is obvious resistance. Success is defined as the immediate relief of all symptoms and normal findings at physical examination [285] (LE: 3). Doppler US may be used for guidance [286]. Bilateral orchiopexy is still required after successful detorsion. This should not be done as an elective procedure, but rather immediately following detorsion. One study reported residual torsion during exploration in 17 out of 53 patients, including eleven patients who had reported pain relief after manual detorsion [285,287]. External cooling before exploration may be effective in reducing ischaemia reperfusion injury and preserving the viability of the torsed and the contralateral testis [288]. Medical treatments aimed at limiting such injury remain experimental [289-292]. Torsion of the appendix testis can be managed non-operatively with the use of anti-inflammatory analgesics (LE: 4). During the six-week follow-up, clinically and with US, no testicular atrophy was revealed. Surgical exploration is done in equivocal cases and in patients with persistent pain [273]. Although metachronous torsion of the appendix testis may occur in up to 8.5%, it is not necessary to explore the contralateral side, given the benign nature ot the problem. Besides it has been demonstrated that the NNT is 24 [293]. 3.6.3.3. Surgical treatment Testicular torsion is an urgent condition which requires prompt surgical treatment. The two most important determinants of early salvage rate of the testis are the time between onset of symptoms and detorsion, and the degree of cord twisting [294]. Severe testicular atrophy occurred after torsion for as little as four hours when the turn was > 360°. In cases of incomplete torsion (180-360°), with symptom duration up to twelve hours, no atrophy was observed. However, a necrotic or severely atrophied testis was found in all cases of torsion > 360° and symptom duration > 24 hours [295]. Early surgical intervention with detorsion (mean torsion time less than thirteen hours) was found to preserve fertility [296]. Urgent surgical exploration is mandatory in all cases of testicular torsion within 24 hours of symptom onset. In patients with testicular torsion > 24 hours, exploration may be performed as a semi-elective exploration procedure [294,295] (LE: 3), unless there is a clear history of torsion-detorsion in which urgent exploration should still be considered. In case of prolonged torsion (> 24 hours) it is still subject to debate whether the surgically detorsed testis should be preserved. An alternative to detorsion and fixation may be to perform orchiectomy. A study found that sperm quality was preserved after both orchiectomy and orchidopexy in comparison to normal control men, although orchiectomy resulted in better sperm morphology [297] Incision of the tunica albuginea with tunica vaginalis graft to prevent or treat compartment syndrome has also been suggested [298]. In neonates with signs of testicular torsion at birth the duration of symptoms will not be clear. The decision to perform surgical exploration should be weighed against the general condition of the child. In this age group the operation can safely be done under spinal anesthesia. New onset of symptoms of testicular torsion in neonates should be considered a surgical emergency similar to older boys. During exploration, fixation of the contralateral testis is also performed. It is good clinical practice to also perform fixation of the contralateral testis in prenatal and neonatal torsion, although there is no literature to support this, and to remove an atrophied testicle [299]. Recurrence after orchidopexy is rare (4.5%) and may occur several years later. There is no consensus recommendation about the preferred type of fixation and suture material [300]. 3.6.4. Follow-up Patients require follow-up mainly for fertility issues and hormonal consequences. Despite timely and adequate detorsion and fixation of the testicle, up to half of the patients may develop testicular atrophy, even when intraoperatively assessed as viable, and should be counselled accordingly [301,302]. 3.6.4.1. Fertility The results vary and are conflicting. In one study, unilateral torsion of the testis seriously intervened with subsequent spermatogenesis in about 50% of the patients and produced borderline impairment in another 20% [279]. Although, 30% of affected testicles with mumps orchitis show a degree of atrophy, long-term outcome in terms of fertility is not conclusive [303]. A study showed a normal pregnancy rate after unilateral testicular torsion, with no difference between the patients undergoing orchidopexy and those after orchidectomy [304]. 3.6.4.2. Subfertility Subfertility is found in 36-39% of patients after torsion. Semen analysis may be normal in only 5-50% in long-term follow-up [294]. Early surgical intervention (mean torsion time less than thirteen hours) with detorsion was found to preserve fertility, but a prolonged torsion period (mean 70 hours) followed by orchiectomy jeopardised fertility [296]. Subfertility and infertility are consequences of direct injury to the testis after the torsion. This is caused by the cut-off of blood supply, but also by post-ischaemia-reperfusion injury that is caused after the detorsion when oxygen-derived free radicals are rapidly circulated within the testicular parenchyma [294]. 3.6.4.3. Androgen levels Even though the levels of FSH, luteinising hormone (LH) and testosterone are higher in patients after testicular torsion compared to normal controls, endocrine testicular function remains in the normal range after testicular torsion [297]. 3.6.4.4. Unanswered questions Although testicular torsion is a common problem, the mechanism of neonatal and prenatal torsion is still not exactly known, as well as whether fixation of the contralateral testicle in these cases is really necessary. The influence of an atrophied testicle on fertility is also unclear. Summary of evidenceLEDiagnosis of testicular torsion is based on presentation and physical exam.-Doppler US is an effective imaging tool to evaluate acute scrotum and comparable to scintigraphy and dynamic contrast-enhanced subtraction MRI.2aNeonates with acute scrotum should be treated as surgical emergencies.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingTesticular torsion is a paediatric urological emergency and requires immediate treatment.StrongIn neonates with testicular torsion perform orchidopexy of the contralateral testicle. In prenatal torsion the timing of surgery is usually dictated by clinical findings.WeakBase the clinical decision on physical examination. The use of Doppler ultrasound to evaluate acute scrotum is useful, but this should not delay the intervention.StrongManage torsion of the appendix testis conservatively. Perform surgical exploration in equivocal cases and in patients with persistent pain.StrongPerform urgent surgical exploration in all cases of testicular torsion within 24 hours of symptom onset. In prenatal torsion the timing of surgery is usually dictated by clinical findings.Strong 