3.8. Congenital penile curvature. 3.8.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Congenital penile curvature presents penile bending of a normally formed penis due to corporal disproportion. The incidence at birth is 0.6% and congenital penile curvature is caused by asymmetry of the cavernous bodies and an orthotopic meatus [386] because of developmental arrest during embryogenesis [387]. On the other hand, the incidence of clinically significant congenital penile curvature is much lower, because the extent of the curvature and its associated sexual dysfunction varies widely [388]. Most of the cases are ventral deviations (48%), followed by lateral (24%), dorsal (5%), and a combination of ventral and lateral (23%) [389]. Most ventral curvatures are associated with hypospadias due to chordee or ventral dysplasia of cavernous bodies [390]. Similarly, dorsal curvature is mostly associated with exstrophy/epispadias complex. Congenital penile curvature can decrease sexual quality of life in adults and successful repair can restore patients’ psychosocial and sexual wellbeing [391]. Curvature > 30° is considered clinically significant; curvature > 60° may interfere with satisfactory sexual intercourse in adulthood (LE: 4). Minor penile curvature may be the result of ventral penile skin deficiency only and should be distinguished from corporal anomalies. For penile curvature associated with hypospadias or epispadias refer to the relevant chapters. 3.8.2. Diagnostic evaluation Penile curvature is frequently not documented until later in childhood since the penis only appears abnormal when erect. Patients are usually concerned with the aesthetic and/or functional aspects of their penis [392]. Besides exact history taking to exclude any possibility of acquired penile curvature (e.g. post-traumatic), a thorough clinical examination is mandatory. In addition, photo documentation of the erect penis clearly showing the curvature from different angles serves as a pre-requisite in pre-operative evaluation [393]. The exact degree of curvature is generally determined at the time of surgery using an artificial erection test. 3.8.3. Management The treatment is surgical, starting with an artificial erection to determine the degree of curvature and to check symmetry after the repair [394]. The ultimate goal of any surgical method used to correct the curvature is to achieve corpora of similar size. Various procedures are in use ranging from simple de-gloving and plication procedures, to corporal rotation, use of free dermal or tunica vaginalis grafts, to complete penile disassembly techniques [395,396]. Reviews comparing the outcome of Nesbit/modified Nesbit procedures [397] to plication procedures [398] were able to demonstrate that while there is a decreased risk of complications and loss of sensation, it remains unclear whether plication techniques can lead to increased risk of recurrence [399,400]. Altogether these methods include the risk of post-operative shortening of the penis with an average loss of 2.5 cm in stretched penile length depending on the pre-operative degree of curvature and the type of repair used [401-403]. Recently the non-corporotomy technique has been introduced with promising results enabling correction of any degree of ventral curvature with neither shortening of the penis nor the risk of post-operative erectile dysfunction [404]. 3.8.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of congenital penile curvature Summary of evidenceLEIsolated congenital penile curvature is relatively uncommon.2aCongenital penile curvature is often associated with hypospadias.2aDiagnosis is usually made late in childhood.2aThe penis only appears abnormal when erect.1bCongenital penile curvature can cause aesthetic as well as functional sexual problems.1bCongenital penile curvature is treated with surgery.1bThe goal of surgery is to achieve corpora of similar size.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingEnsure that a thorough medical history is taken and a full clinical examination done to rule out associated anomalies in boys presenting with congenital curvature.StrongProvide photo documentation of the erect penis from different angles as a prerequisite in the pre-operative evaluation.StrongPerform surgery after weighing aesthetic as well as functional implications of the curvature.WeakAt the beginning as well as at the end of surgery, perform artificial erection tests.Strong 