3.9. Varicocele in children and adolescents. 3.9.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Varicocele is defined as an abnormal dilatation of testicular veins in the pampiniformis plexus caused by venous reflux. It is unusual in boys under ten years of age and becomes more frequent at the beginning of puberty. It is found in 14-20% of adolescents, with a similar incidence during adulthood. It appears mostly on the left side (78-93% of cases). Right-sided varicoceles are less common; they are usually noted only when bilateral varicoceles are present and seldom occur as an isolated finding [405-407]. Varicocele develops during accelerated body growth and increased blood flow to the testes, by a mechanism that is not clearly understood. Genetic factors may be present [408,409]. An anatomic abnormality leading to impaired venous drainage is expressed by the considerable prevalence of the left side condition where the internal spermatic vein drains into the renal vein. Varicocele can induce apoptotic pathways because of heat stress, androgen deprivation and accumulation of toxic materials [410,411]. In 70% of patients with grade II and III varicocele, left testicular volume loss was found. Abnormal reproductive hormonal levels (increased serum levels of FSH and LH, and decreased levels of inhibin B) and semen quality were reported in varicocele patients and were directly related to varicocele severity [412-414]. Severe histological damage is found in 20% of adolescents affected, with abnormal findings in 46% of affected adolescents. Histological findings are similar in children or adolescents and in infertile men. In about 20% of adolescents with varicocele, fertility problems will arise [415]. The adverse influence of varicocele increases with time. 3.9.2. Classification systems Varicocele is classified into 3 grades [416]: Grade I - Valsalva positive (palpable at Valsalva manoeuvre only);Grade II - palpable (palpable without the Valsalva manoeuvre);Grade III - visible (visible at distance). 3.9.3. Diagnostic evaluation Varicocele, being mostly asymptomatic, is generally noticed by the patient or caregivers, or discovered by the paediatrician at a routine visit. The diagnosis depends upon the clinical finding of a collection of dilated and tortuous veins in the upright posture; the veins are more pronounced when the patient performs the Valsalva manoeuvre. Clinical examination shoud include evaluation of the size of both testicles to detect a smaller testis. In pre-pubertal boys and in isolated right varicocele, a renal US should be routinely added in order to rule out a secondary varicocele due to any retroperitoneal tumour extending into the renal vein and inferior vena cava. Testicular volume is measured by US examination or by orchidometer. In adolescents, a testis that is smaller by > 2 mL or 20% compared to the other testis is considered to be hypotrophic [417]. Venous reflux into the plexus pampiniformis is diagnosed using Doppler US colour flow mapping in the supine and upright position and with valsalva manoeuvre [418]. Venous reflux detected on US only is classified as subclinical varicocele. Severity of reflux on Doppler US was shown to correlate with testicular damage [413]. Sperm analysis in principle allows assessment of testicular function, but the World Health Organization (WHO) parameters are not intended for pre-pubertal patients, and spontaneous improvements of abnormal sperm analyses has been observed in pre-pubertal patients [419]. Moreover, sperm analysis encounters cultural/ethical barriers in children [420]. Therefore, semen analysis in not widely used and it is generally recommended only in older adolescents. In order to assess testicular injury in adolescents with varicocele, supranormal FSH and LH responses to the luteinising hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) stimulation test are considered reliable, because histopathological testicular changes have been found in these patients [421,422]. 3.9.4. Management There is no evidence that treatment of varicocele at paediatric age will offer a better andrological outcome than an operation performed later and earlier diagnosis should not convey a more pressing need to intervene [423,424]. Beneficial effect of pubertal screening and treatment for varicocele regarding the preservation of fertility and final chance of paternity is controversial [425-427]. The recommended indication criteria for correction for varicocele in children and adolescents are [406]: varicocele associated with a small testis (this should be confirmed on two subsequent visits performed six months apart) as asynchronous testicular growth can account for a temporary asymmetry also in a considerable number of healthy adolescents [428]. Additional scenarios where varicocele treatment can be considered on a case by case basis include: symptomatic varicocele [427]. Pain is present in 2-10% of varicoceles. The association between varicocele and pain is unclear and patients should be informed that pain can persist after varicocelectomy in 20% of cases [429];additional testicular condition affecting fertility such as a contralateral testicular condition;bilateral palpable varicocele;pathological sperm quality (in older adolescents);cosmetic reasons related to their scrotal swelling. A reduced total testicular volume (left + right) in comparison with normal testes is a promising indication criterion, once the normal values are available [414,423]. Repair of a large varicocele, causing physical or psychological discomfort, may also be considered. Other varicoceles should be followed-up until a reliable sperm analysis can be performed. 3.9.4.1. Surgical management Surgical intervention is based on ligation or occlusion of the internal spermatic veins. Ligation is performed at different levels: inguinal (or subinguinal) microsurgical ligation;suprainguinal ligation, using open or laparoscopic techniques [430-433]. The advantage of the former is the lower invasiveness of the procedure, while the advantage of the latter is a considerably lower number of veins to be ligated and safety of the incidental division of the internal spermatic artery at the suprainguinal level. For surgical ligation, some form of optical magnification (microscopic or laparoscopic) should be used because the internal spermatic artery is 0.5 mm in diameter at the level of the internal ring [430,432]. In suprainguinal approach, an artery sparing varicocelectomy may not offer any advantage in regards to catch-up growth and is associated with a higher incidence of recurrent varicocele [434,435]. Lymphatic-sparing varicocelectomy is preferred to prevent hydrocele formation and testicular hypertrophy development and to achieve a better testicular function according to the LHRH stimulation test [430,431,436,437]. The methods of choice are subinguinal or inguinal microsurgical (microscopic) repairs, or suprainguinal open or laparoscopic lymphatic-sparing repairs [430,432,438,439]. In the later, intrascrotal/intratesticular injection of isosulphan blue was recommended to visualise the lymphatic vessels [440,441] 3.9.4.2. Radiological management Angiographic occlusion of the internal spermatic veins also meets the requirements of lymphatic sparing repair. It is based on retrograde or antegrade sclerotisation of the internal spermatic veins [442,443]. However, although this method is less invasive and may not require general anaesthesia, it is associated with radiation burden, which is less controllable in the antegrade technique [406,442,443]. There is low to moderate level of evidence that radiological or surgical treatment of adolescent varicocele is associated with improved testicular size/growth and sperm concentration. Several authors reported testicular catch-up growth after varicocelectomy in adolescents [444,445]. An average proportion of catch-up growth of 76.4% (range: 52.6-93.8%) has been found according to a meta-analysis [446] (LE: 2a). However, this may partly be attributable to testicular oedema associated with the division of lymphatic vessels [436]. Improvement in sperm parameters has been demonstrated after adolescent varicocelectomy [421,447-449]. In one study, microsurgical varicocele repair in adolescents with varicocele significantly increases paternity rates and decreases time to conception post-operatively, but this needs to be confirmed in other series. The ultimate effects on fertility and paternity rates are not known [450]. The Panel conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis regarding the treatment of varicocele in children and adolescents [451]. Of 1,550 articles identified, 98 articles including 16,130 patients were eligible for inclusion (12 RCTs, 47 NRSs and 39 case series). The key findings are summarised in the following paragraphs: The meta-analysis of the twelve RCTs revealed that varicocele treatment improved testicular volume (mean difference 1.52 ml, 95% CI 0.73-2.31) and increased total sperm concentration (mean difference 25.54, 95% CI 12.84-38.25) when compared with observation. Lymphatic sparing surgery significantly decreased hydrocele rates (p=0.02) and the OR was 0.08 (95% CI 0.01, 0.67). Due to the lack of RCTs, it was not possible to identify a surgical technique as being superior to the others. It remains unclear whether open surgery or laparoscopy is more successful for varicocele treatment (OR ranged from 0.13 to 2.84). The success rates of the treatment (disappearance of varicocele) were between 85.1% and 100% whereas the complication rates were between 0% and 29% in the included studies. The most common complication reported was hydrocele. Resolution of pain after treatment was more than 90% in the reported series. The major reason for varicocele recurrence is the persistence of branched spermatic veins that were not ligated during the initial repair. Treatment of recurrence is warranted only in those patients with clinical recurrence that show no improvement in testicular asymmetry or remain symptomatic. Treatment of recurrence can be surgical or via embolisation. Generally, a technique different from the primary repair is recommended to operate in a virgin field [452]. In conclusion, moderate evidence exists on the benefits of varicocele treatment in children and adolescents in terms of testicular volume and sperm concentration. Current evidence does not demonstrate superiority of any of the surgical/interventional techniques regarding treatment success. Lymphatic sparing surgery significantly decreases hydrocele formation. Long-term outcomes, including paternity and fertility, still remain unknown. In conclusion, moderate evidence exists on the benefits of varicocele treatment in children and adolescents in terms of testicular volume and sperm concentration. Current evidence does not demonstrate superiority of any of the surgical/interventional techniques regarding treatment success. Lymphatic sparing surgery significantly decreases hydrocele formation. Long-term outcomes, including paternity and fertility, still remain unknown. 3.9.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of varicocele Summary of evidenceLEVaricocele becomes more frequent at the onset of puberty and is found in 14-20% of adolescents.Testicular problems are reported in up to 20% of patients, but the final effect on paternity is unknown.3After adolescent varicocelectomy, left testis catch-up growth and improvement in sperm parameters has been demonstrated.3There is no evidence that treatment of varicocele at paediatric age will offer a better andrological outcome than an operation performed later.1aDivision of testicular lymphatics leads to hydrocele in up to 40% and to testicular hypertrophy. Lymphatic sparing surgery significantly decrease hydrocele rates.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingExamine varicocele in the standing position and classify into three grades.StrongUse scrotal ultrasound to evaluate testicular volume and to detect venous reflux in the supine and upright position and during Valsalva maneuver.StrongIn all pre-pubertal boys with a varicocele and in all isolated right varicoceles, perform standard abdominal ultrasound to rule out a retroperitonal mass.StrongInform caregivers and patients and offer surgery for varicocele associated with a persistent small testis (size difference of > 2 mL or 20%).StrongVaricocele treatment can be also considered under the following circumstances:symptomatic varicocele;additional testicular condition affecting fertility such as a contralateral testicular condition;bilateral palpable varicocele;pathological sperm quality (in older adolescents);cosmetic reasons related to their scrotal swelling.WeakUse some form of optical magnification (microscopic or laparoscopic magnification) for surgical ligation.StrongUse lymphatic-sparing varicocelectomy to prevent hydrocele formation.Strong 