10.2. Antibiotics. Post-operative wound infection and UTI are common post-operative complications and infection at the site of reconstruction may contribute to failure of urethroplasty. The vast majority of reconstructive urologists perform urine culture one to two weeks prior to surgery [542]. Urine culture is superior to urine-analysis which can be omitted in the pre-operative evaluation [542]. If infection or colonisation is present, a therapeutic course with antibiotics is recommended pre-operatively. Preoperative UTI, even when properly treated, could increase the risk of post-operative UTI [543]. In case of an indwelling catheter general principles would suggest at least an attempt to suppress the colonisation with pre-operative antibiotics [542]. These practices are in accordance with the strong recommendations of the EAU Guidelines on Urological Infections: “Screen for and treat asymptomatic bacteriuria prior to urological procedures breaching the mucosa.”“Treat catheter-associated asymptomatic bacteriuria prior to traumatic urinary tract interventions.” An intra-operative prophylactic regimen with antibiotics (according to local antibiotic resistance profiles) is effective in reducing the rate of post-operative surgical site and UTIs [542]. Although most urologists continue with post-operative antibiotics upon and even beyond catheter removal, there is no evidence that such a prolonged administration would reduce the infective complication rate [542]. A retrospective study from Baas et al., revealed that extended postoperative antibiotic prophylaxis (three weeks until catheter removal versus 3 days around catheter removal) does not appear to affect UTI rates following urethroplasty [544]. The EAU Guidelines on Urological Infections do not routinely recommend the use of antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent clinical UTI after urethral catheter removal. There is no evidence that this recommendation would not apply to catheter removal after urethral surgery. Summary of evidenceLEAn intra-operative prophylactic regimen with antibiotics is effective in reducing the rate of postoperative surgical site and urinary tract infections.4 RecommendationStrength ratingAdminister an intra-operative prophylactic regimen with antibiotics at time of urethral surgery.Strong 