3.1. Classification. Different classification systems of UTI exist. Most widely used are those developed by the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [5], Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) [6], European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID) [7] as well as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [8,9]. Current UTI guidelines frequently use the concept of uncomplicated and complicated UTI with a number of modifications (Figure 1). In 2011 the EAU Section of Infections in Urology proposed the ORENUC classification system based on the clinical presentation of the UTI, the anatomical level of the UTI, the grade of severity of the infection, the categorisation of risk factors and availability of appropriate antimicrobial therapy [10]. Figure 1: Concept of uncomplicated and complicated UTI The following classification of UTIs is adopted in the EAU Urological Infections Guidelines: Classification of UTIUncomplicated UTIsAcute, sporadic or recurrent lower (uncomplicated cystitis) and/or upper (uncomplicated pyelonephritis) UTI, limited to non-pregnant women with no known relevant anatomical and functional abnormalities within the urinary tract or comorbidities.Complicated UTIsAll UTIs which are not defined as uncomplicated. Meaning in a narrower sense UTIs in a patient with an increased chance of a complicated course: i.e. all men, pregnant women, patients with relevant anatomical or functional abnormalities of the urinary tract, indwelling urinary catheters, renal diseases, and/or with other concomitant immunocompromising diseases for example, diabetes.Recurrent UTIsRecurrences of uncomplicated and/or complicated UTIs, with a frequency of at least three UTIs/year or two UTIs in the last six months.Catheter-associated UTIsCatheter-associated urinary tract infection (CA-UTI) refers to UTIs occurring in a person whose urinary tract is currently catheterised or has had a catheter in place within the past 48 hours.UrosepsisUrosepsis is defined as life threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection originating from the urinary tract and/or male genital organs [11]. 