3.10. Urethritis. 3.10.1. Introduction Urethritis can be of either infectious or non-infectious origin. Inflammation of the urethra presents usually with LUTS and must be distinguished from other infections of the lower urinary tract. Urethral infection is typically spread by sexual contact. 3.10.2. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathogenesis From a therapeutic and clinical point of view, gonorrhoeal urethritis (GU) caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae must be differentiated from non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU). Non-gonococcal urethritis is a non-specific diagnosis that can have many infectious aetiologies. Causative pathogens include Chlamydia trachomatis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum and Trichomonas vaginalis. The role of Ureaplasma spp. as urethritis causative pathogens is controversial. Recent data suggests that U. urealyticum, but not U. parvum is an aetiological agent in NGU [304]. The prevalence of isolated causative pathogens are: C. trachomatis 11-50%; M. genitalium 6-50%; Ureaplasmas 5-26%; T. vaginalis 1-20%; and adenoviruses 2-4% [305]. Causative agents either remain extracellularly on the epithelial layer or penetrate into the epithelium (N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis) and cause pyogenic infection. Although arising from urethritis, chlamydiae and gonococci can spread further through the urogenital tract to cause epididymitis in men or cervicitis, endometritis and salpingitis in women [306]. Mucopurulent or purulent discharge, dysuria and urethral pruritus are symptoms of urethritis. However, many infections of the urethra are asymptomatic. 3.10.3. Evidence Summary A systematic search of the literature form January 2014 until February 2019 identified 488 titles of which 71 were selected for full text review. Thirteen systematic reviews or guidelines based on systematic literature searches [304-316], and seventeen original publications [317-333] were selected for further analysis. In addition, a further eleven relevant publications were identified from the references of the reviewed literature [334-344]. The evidence questions addressed were: In patients with urethritis what is the best method of detecting the causative pathogen?In patients with urethritis what are the best treatment strategies for clinical or microbiological cure? 3.10.4. Diagnostic evaluation In symptomatic patients the diagnosis of urethritis can be made based on the presence of any of the following criteria [305,306]: Mucoid, mucopurulent, or purulent urethral discharge. Gram or methylene-blue stain of urethral secretions demonstrating inflammation. Five or more polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNL) per high power field (HPF) is the historical cut-off for the diagnosis of urethritis. A threshold of ≥ 2 PMNL/HPF was proposed recently based on better diagnostic accuracy [321,334-336], but this was not supported by other studies [320]. Therefore, in line with the 2016 European Guideline on the management of NGU [305] the use of ≥ 5 PMNL/HPF cut-off level is recommended until the benefit of alternative cut-off levels is confirmed. The presence of ≥ 10 PMNL/HPF in the sediment from a spun first-void urine sample or a positive leukocyte esterase test in first-void urine. Evidence of urethral inflammation in the Gram stain of urethral secretions with gonococci located intracellularly as Gram-negative diplococci indicates GU. Non-gonococcal urethritis is confirmed when staining of urethral secretions indicates inflammation in the absence of intracellular diplococci. Clinicians should always perform point-of-care diagnostics (e.g. Gram staining, first-void urine with microscopy, leukocyte esterase testing) if available to obtain objective evidence of urethral inflammation and to guide treatment [305,306,319]. Recent studies showed that processing time of point-of-care diagnostics is highly relevant in terms of patient compliance and real-life applicability [317,318]. Men who meet the criteria for urethritis should be tested for C. trachomatis, M. genitalium and N. gonorrhoea with nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT), even if point-of-care tests are negative for gonorrhoeae [305,308]. The sensitivity and specificity of NAATs is better than that of any of the other tests available for the diagnosis of chlamydial and gonococcal infections [309,337]. The performance of first-catch urine is non-inferior to urethral swabs [337]. In case of delayed treatment, if a NAAT is positive for gonorrhoea, a culture using urethral swabs should be performed before treatment to assess the antimicrobial resistance profile of the infective strain [306]. N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis cultures are mainly used to evaluate treatment failures and monitor developing resistance to current treatment. Trichomonas spp. can usually be identified microscopically [306] or by NAATs [311]. Non-gonococcal urethritis is classified as persistent when symptoms do not resolve within three to four weeks following treatment. When this occurs NAATs should be performed for urethritis pathogens including T. vaginalis four weeks after completion of therapy [305,322]. 3.10.5. Disease management For severe urethritis empirical treatment should be started following diagnosis. If the patients symptoms are mild, delayed treatment guided by the results of NAATs is recommended. All sexual partners at risk should be assessed and treated whilst maintaining patient confidentiality [305,325]. 3.10.5.1. Gonococcal urethritis For GU, a combination treatment using two antimicrobials with different mechanisms of action is recommended to improve treatment efficacy and to hinder increasing resistance to cephalosporins [306]. Ceftriaxone 1 g intramuscularly or intravenously with azithromycin 1 g single oral dose should be used as first-line treatment. Azithromycin is recommended because of its favourable susceptibility rates compared to other antimicrobials, good compliance with the single-dose regimen and the possibility of a C. trachomatis co-infection [306]. In case of azithromycin allergy, doxycycline can be used instead in combination with ceftriaxone or cefixime [306]. A 400 mg oral dose of cefixime is recommended as an alternative regimen to ceftriaxone; however, it has less favourable pharmacodynamics and may lead to the emergence of resistance [307,343]. A number of alternative regimens for the treatment of GU have been studied. In a randomised, open label, non-comparative clinical study dual treatment with a combination of intramuscular gentamicin 240 mg plus oral azithromycin 2 g (n=202) single doses and a combination of oral gemifloxacin 320 mg plus oral azithromycin 2 g (n=199) single doses were associated with microbiological cure rates of 100% and 99.5%, respectively [339]. A 2014 systematic review focusing on the use of single-dose intramuscular gentamicin concluded that there is insufficient data to support or refute the efficacy and safety of this regimen in the treatment of uncomplicated gonorrhoea [313]. In three prospective single arm studies enrolling men with GU the use of extended-release azithromycin 2 g single oral dose resulted in microbiological cure rates of 83% (n=36), 93.8% (n=122) and 90.9% (n=33), respectively [329,330,332]. However, azithromycin monotherapy is generally not recommended because of its effect on increasing macrolide resistance rates [306]. Intramuscular spectinomycin 2 g single dose shows microbiological cure rates above 96% [340,343] in urogenital gonorrhoeal infections; therefore, where available, it can be a valid treatment alternative. An open label, randomised trial compared oral fosfomycin trometamol 3 g on days one, three and five (n=60) with intramuscular ceftriaxone 250 mg plus oral azithromycin 1 g single dose (n=61) in men with uncomplicated GU. In the per-protocol analysis clinical and microbiologic cure rates were 96.8% and 95.3% respectively [333]. The worldwide increase in gonorrhoeal antimicrobial resistance and the emergence of multidrug-resistant gonorrhoeal strains is a globally recognised healthcare crisis which emphasises the importance of guideline adherence [312,324,344]. 3.10.5.2. Non-gonococcal urethritis For NGU without an identified pathogen oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for seven days should be used as first-line treatment. Alternatively, single dose oral azithromycin 500 mg day one and 250 mg days two to four can be used. This regimen provides better efficacy compared to azithromycin 1 g single dose for M. genitalium infections, in which azithromycin 1 g single dose treatment is associated with the development of increasing macrolide resistance significantly decreasing the overall cure rate [305,308,314,328]. However, a retrospective cohort study did not find significant difference between the extended and 1 g single dose azithromycin regimen regarding cure rates and the selection of macrolide resistance in M. genitalium urethritis [326]. If macrolide resistant M. genitalium is detected moxifloxacin 400 mg can be used for seven to fourteen days [305,306,315]. In case of failure after both azithromycin and moxifloxacin treatment, pristinamycin (registered in France) is the only antimicrobial agent with documented activity against M. genitalium [308,327,338]. Josamycin 500 mg three times a day for ten days is used in Russia, but will not eradicate macrolide-resistant strains [308]. For chlamydial urethritis azithromycin 1 g single dose and doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for seven days are both effective options [342]. A Cochrane Review found that in men with urogenital C. trachomatis infection regimens with azithromycin are probably less effective than doxycycline for microbiological failure, however, there might be little or no difference for clinical failure [316]. Fluoroquinolones, such as ofloxacin or levofloxacin, may be used as second-line treatment only in selected cases where the use of other agents is not possible [341]. For U. urealyticum infections the efficacy of doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for seven days is similar to azithromycin 1 g single dose treatment [305,323]. For urethritis caused by T. vaginalis oral metronidazole or tinidazole 2 g single dose is recommended as first-line treatment. For treatment options for persistent or recurrent T. vaginalis infection refer to the review of Sena et. al [311]. In case of persistent NGU treatment should cover M. genitalium and T. vaginalis [305,306]. 3.10.6. Follow-up Patients should be followed up for control of pathogen eradication after completion of therapy only if therapeutic adherence is in question, symptoms persist or reoccurrence is suspected. Patients should be instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse for seven days after therapy is initiated, provided their symptoms have resolved and their sexual partners have been adequately treated. Reporting and source tracing should be done in accordance with national guidelines and in cooperation with specialists in venereology, whenever required. Persons who have been diagnosed with a new STD should receive testing for other STDs, including syphilis and HIV [310]. 3.10.7. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnostic evaluation and antimicrobial treatment of urethritis Summary of evidenceLEA Gram stain of urethral discharge or a urethral smear that shows ≥ 5 leukocytes per high power field (× 1,000) and gonococci located intracellularly as Gram-negative diplococci, indicates gonococcal urethritis.3bValidated NAATs of first-void urine samples have better sensitivity and specificity than any of the other tests available for the diagnosis of chlamydial and gonococcal infections.2aFor GU dual treatment with ceftriaxone and azithromycin is the most effective combination.2aIn case of urogenital C. trachomatis infection in men azithromycin is probably less effective than doxycycline for microbiological failure, however, there might be little or no difference for clinical failure.1aIn case of U. urealyticum infection the efficacy of doxycycline 100 mg twice for seven days is similar to azithromycin 1 g single dose treatment.2a RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform a Gram stain of urethral discharge or a urethral smear to preliminarily diagnose gonococcal urethritis.StrongPerform a validated nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) on a first-void urine sample or urethral smear prior to empirical treatment to diagnose chlamydial and gonococcal infections.StrongDelay treatment until the results of the NAATs are available to guide treatment choice in patients with mild symptoms.StrongPerform a urethral swab culture, prior to initiation of treatment, in patients with a positive NAAT for gonorrhoea to assess the antimicrobial resistance profile of the infective strain.StrongUse a pathogen directed treatment based on local resistance data.StrongSexual partners should be treated maintaining patient confidentiality.Strong Table 8: Suggested regimens for antimicrobial therapy for urethritis PathogenAntimicrobialDosage & Duration of therapyAlternative regimensGonococcal InfectionCeftriaxoneAzithromycin1 g i.m. or i.v.*, SD1 g p.o., SDCefixime 400 mg p.o., SD plus Azithromycin 1 g p.o., SDIn case of cephalosporin allergy:Gentamicin 240 mg i.m SD plus Azithromycin 2 g p.o., SDGemifloxacin 320 mg p.o., SD plus Azithromycin 2 g p.o., SDSpectinomycin 2 g i.m., SDFosfomycin trometamol 3 g p.o. on days 1, 3 and 5In case of azithromycin allergy, in combination with ceftriaxone or cefixime:Doxycycline 100 mg b.i.d, p.o., 7 daysNon-Gonococcal infection(non-identified pathogen)Doxycycline100 mg b.i.d, p.o.,7 daysAzithromycin500 mg p.o., day 1,250 mg p.o., 4 daysChlamydia trachomatisAzithromycinOrDoxycycline1.0-1.5 g p.o., SD100 mg b.i.d, p.o., for 7 daysLevofloxacin 500 mg p.o., q.d., 7 daysOfloxacin 200 mg p.o., b.i.d., 7 daysMycoplasma genitaliumAzithromycin500 mg p.o., day 1,250 mg p.o., 4 daysIn case of macrolide resistance:Moxifloxacin 400 mg q.d., 7-14 daysUreaplasma urealyticumDoxycycline100 mg b.i.d, p.o.,7 daysAzithromycin 1.0-1.5 g p.o., SDTrichomonas vaginalisMetronidazoleTinidazole2 g p.o., SD2 g p.o., SDMetronidazole 500 mg p.o., b.i.d., 7 daysPersistent non-gonococcal urethritisAfter first-line doxycyclineAzithromycinplusMetronidazole500 mg p.o., day 1,250 mg p.o., 4 days400 mg b.i.d. p.o., 5 daysIf macrolide resistant M. genitalium is detected moxifloxacin should be substituted for azithromycinAfter first-line azithromycinMoxifloxacinplusMetronidazole400 mg p.o. q.d., 7-14 days400 mg b.i.d. p.o., 5 days SD = single dose; b.i.d = twice daily; q.d = everyday; p.o. = orally; i.m. = intramuscular; i.v. = intravenous.* Despite the lack of RCTs there is increasing evidence that intravenous treatment with ceftriaxone is safe and effective for the treatment of gonorrhoeal infections and avoids the discomfort of an intramuscular injection for patients [345]. 