3.11. Bacterial Prostatitis. 3.11.1. Introduction Bacterial prostatitis is a clinical condition caused by bacterial pathogens. It is recommended that urologists use the classification suggested by the National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), in which bacterial prostatitis, with confirmed or suspected infection, is distinguished from chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CPPS) (Table 9) [346-348]. Table 9: Classification of prostatitis and CPPS according to NIDDK/NIH  [346-348] TypeName and descriptionIAcute bacterial prostatitis (ABP)IIChronic bacterial prostatitis (CBP)IIIChronic non-bacterial prostatitis – CPPSIIIAInflammatory CPPS (white cells in semen/EPS/VB3)IIIBNon-inflammatory CPPS (no white cells in semen/EPS/VB3)IVAsymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis (histological prostatitis) CPPS = chronic pelvic pain syndrome; EPS = expressed prostatic secretion; VB3 = voided bladder urinespecimen 3 (urine following prostatic massage). 3.11.2. Evidence Summary A systematic literature search from 1980 until June 2017 was performed. One systematic review [349], six RCTs [350-355], two narrative reviews [356,357], one prospective cohort study [358], two prospective cross-sectional studies [359,360], and one retrospective cohort study [352], were selected from 856 references. A retrospective study [361], investigated the potential role of unusual pathogens in prostatitis syndrome in 1,442 patients over a four-year period. An infectious aetiology was determined in 74.2% of patients; C. trachomatis, T. vaginalis and U. urealyticum infections were found in 37.2%, 10.5% and 5% of patients, respectively whilst E. coli infection was found in only 6.6% of cases. Cross sectional studies confirmed the validity of the Meares and Stamey test to determine the bacterial strain and targeted antibiotic therapies [359,360]. The evidence levels were good, in particular those regarding information on atypical strains, epidemiology and antibiotic treatments. A systematic review on antimicrobial therapy for CBP [349] compared multiple antibiotic regimens from eighteen selected studies enrolling a total of 2,196 patients. The role of fluoroquinolones as first line agents was confirmed with no significant differences between levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin and prulifloxacin in terms of microbiological eradication, clinical efficacy and adverse events. The efficacy of macrolides and tetracyclines on atypical pathogens was confirmed. Randomised controlled trials on combined treatments [354,355] indicated that the combination of plants/herbal extracts or PDE5Is with antibiotics may improve quality of life and symptoms in patients with CBP; however, the number of enrolled patients was inadequate to obtain definitive conclusions. A review of treatment of bacterial prostatitis [356] indicated that the treatment of CBP is hampered by the lack of an active antibiotic transport mechanism into infected prostate tissue and fluids. The review underlined the potential effect of different compounds in the treatment of ABP and CBP on the basis of over 40 studies on the topic. One RCT compared the effects of two different metronidazole regimens for the treatment of CBP caused by T. vaginalis [353]. Metronidazole 500 mg three times daily for fourteen days was found to be efficient for micro-organism eradication in 93.3% of patients with clinical failure in 3.33% of cases. The evidence question addressed was: In men with NIDDK/NIH Category I or II prostatitis what is the best antimicrobial treatment strategy for clinical resolution and eradication of the causative pathogen? 3.11.3. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathogenesis Prostatitis is a common diagnosis, but less than 10% of cases have proven bacterial infection [228]. Enterobacterales, especially E. coli, are the predominant pathogens in ABP [362]. In CBP, the spectrum of species is wider and may include atypical micro-organisms [356]. In patients with immune deficiency or HIV infection, prostatitis may be caused by fastidious pathogens, such as M. tuberculosis, Candida spp. and other rare pathogens, such as Coccidioides immitis, Blastomyces dermatitidis, and Histoplasma capsulatum [363]. The significance of identified intracellular bacteria, such as C. trachomatis, is uncertain [364]; however, two studies have highlighted its possible role as a causative pathogen in CBP [365,366]. 3.11.4. Diagnostic evaluation 3.11.4.1. History and symptoms Acute bacterial prostatitis usually presents abruptly with voiding symptoms and distressing but poorly localised pain. It is often associated with malaise and fever. Transrectal prostate biopsy increases the risk of ABP despite antibiotic prophylaxis and antiseptic prevention procedures [350]. Chronic bacterial prostatitis is defined by symptoms that persist for at least three months [367-369]. The predominant symptoms are pain at various locations including the perineum, scrotum, penis and inner part of the leg as well as LUTS [346-348]. 3.11.4.2. Symptom questionnaires In CBP symptoms appear to have a strong basis for use as a classification parameter [370]. Prostatitis symptom questionnaires have therefore been developed to assess severity and response to therapy [370,371]. They include the validated Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index (CPSI); however, its usefulness in clinical practice is uncertain [358]. 3.11.4.3. Clinical findings In ABP, the prostate may be swollen and tender on DRE. Prostatic massage should be avoided as it can induce bacteraemia and sepsis. Urine dipstick testing for nitrite and leukocytes has a positive predictive value of 95% and a negative predictive value of 70% [372]. Blood culture and complete blood count are useful in ABP. Imaging studies can detect a suspected prostatic abscess [356]. In case of longer lasting symptoms CPPS as well as other urogenital and anorectal disorders must be taken into consideration. Symptoms of CBP or CPPS can mask prostate tuberculosis. Pyospermia and hematospermia in men in endemic regions or with a history of tuberculosis should trigger investigation for urogenital tuberculosis. 3.11.4.4. Urine cultures and expressed prostatic secretion The most important investigation in the evaluation of a patient with ABP is mid-stream urine culture [356]. In CBP, quantitative bacteriological localisation cultures and microscopy of the segmented urine and expressed prostatic secretion (EPS), as described by Meares and Stamey [373], are still important investigations to categorise clinical prostatitis [359,360]. Accurate microbiological analysis of samples from the Meares and Stamey test may also provide useful information on the presence of atypical pathogens such as C. trachomatis, T. vaginalis and U. urealiticum [361]. The two-glass test has been shown to offer similar diagnostic sensitivity to the four-glass test [374]. 3.11.4.5. Prostate biopsy Prostate biopsies cannot be recommended as routine work-up and are not advisable in patients with untreated bacterial prostatitis due to the increased risk of sepsis. 3.11.4.6. Other tests Transrectal US may reveal endoprostatic abscesses, calcification in the prostate, and dilatation of the seminal vesicles; however, it is unreliable as a diagnostic tool for prostatitis [375]. 3.11.4.7. Additional investigations 3.11.4.7.1. Ejaculate analysis Performing an ejaculated semen culture improves the diagnostic utility of the four-glass test [359]; however, semen cultures are more often positive than EPS cultures in men with non-bacterial prostatitis [360]. Bladder outflow and urethral obstruction should always be considered and ruled out by uroflowmetry, retrograde urethrography, or endoscopy. 3.11.4.7.2. First-void urine sample First-void urine is the preferred specimen for the diagnosis of urogenital C. trachomatis infection in men by NAATs, since it is non-invasive and yet allows the detection of infected epithelial cells and associated C. trachomatis particles [376]. 3.11.4.7.3. Prostate specific antigen (PSA) Prostate specific antigen is increased in about 60% and 20% of men with ABP and CBP, respectively [357]. The PSA level decreases after antibiotic therapy (which occurs in approximately 40% of patients) and correlates with clinical and microbiological improvement [351]. Measurement of free and total PSA adds no practical diagnostic information in prostatitis [377]. 3.11.4.8. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnosis of bacterial prostatitis Summary of evidenceLEUrine dipstick testing for nitrite and leukocytes has a positive predictive value of 95% and a negative predictive value of 70% in patients with ABP.3The four-glass Meares and Stamey test is the optimum test for diagnosis of CBP. The two-glass test has been shown to offer similar diagnostic sensitivity in a comparison study.2bFirst-void urine is the preferred specimen for the diagnosis of urogenital C. trachomatis infection in men by NAATs.2bTransrectal ultrasound is unreliable and cannot be used as a diagnostic tool in prostatitis.3Semen culture sensitivity is reported to be approximately 50%; therefore, it is not routinely part of the diagnostic assessment of CBP.3Prostate specific antigen levels may be elevated during active prostatitis; therefore, PSA testing should be avoided as it offers no practical diagnostic information for prostatitis.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not perform prostatic massage in acute bacterial prostatitis (ABP).StrongTake a mid-stream urine dipstick to check nitrite and leukocytes in patients with clinical suspicion of ABP.WeakTake a mid-stream urine culture in patients with ABP symptoms to guide diagnosis and tailor antibiotic treatment.WeakTake a blood culture and a total blood count in patients presenting with ABP.WeakPerform accurate microbiological evaluation for atypical pathogens such as Chlamydia trachomatis or Mycoplasmata in patients with chronic bacterial prostatitis (CBP).WeakPerform the Meares and Stamey 2- or 4-glass test in patients with CBP.StrongPerform transrectal ultrasound in selected cases to rule out the presence of prostatic abscess.WeakDo not routinely perform microbiological analysis of the ejaculate alone to diagnose CBP.Weak 3.11.5. Disease management 3.11.5.1. Antimicrobials Antimicrobials are life-saving in ABP and recommended in CBP. Culture-guided antibiotic treatments are the optimum standard; however, empirical therapies should be considered in all patients with ABP. In ABP parenteral administration of high doses of bactericidal antimicrobials, such as broad-spectrum penicillins, a third-generation cephalosporin or fluoroquinolones, is recommended [378]. For initial therapy, any of these antimicrobials may be combined with an aminoglycoside [362-371,378-382]. Ancillary measures include adequate fluid intake and urine drainage [228]. After normalisation of infection parameters, oral therapy can be substituted and continued for a total of two to four weeks [383]. Fluoroquinolones, despite the high resistance rates of uropathogens, are recommended as first-line agents in the empirical treatment of CBP because of their favourable pharmacokinetic properties [384], their generally good safety profile and antibacterial activity against Gram-negative pathogens including P. aeruginosa and C. trachomatis [349,385]. However, increasing bacterial resistance is a concern. Azithromycin and doxycycline are active against atypical pathogens such as C. trachomatis and genital mycoplasmata [352,361]. Levofloxacin did not demonstrate significant clearance of C. trachomatis in patients with CBP [386]. Metronidazole treatment is indicated in patients with T. vaginalis infections [353]. Duration of fluoroquinolone treatment must be at least fourteen days while azithromycin and doxycycline treatments should be extended to at least three to four weeks [352,361]. In CBP antimicrobials should be given for four to six weeks after initial diagnosis [356]. If intracellular bacteria have been detected macrolides or tetracyclines should be given [349,384,387]. 3.11.5.2. Intraprostatic injection of antimicrobials This treatment has not been evaluated in controlled trials and should not be considered [388,389]. 3.11.5.3. Combined treatments A combination of fluoroquinolones with various herbal extracts may attenuate clinical symptoms without increasing the rate of adverse events [354]. However, a combination of fluoroquinolones with vardenafil did not improve microbiological eradication rates or attenuated pain or voiding symptoms in comparison with fluoroquinolone treatment alone [355]. 3.11.5.4. Drainage and surgery Approximately 10% of men with ABP will experience urinary retention [390] which can be managed by urethral or suprapubic catheterisation. However, recent evidence suggests that suprapubic catheterisation can reduce the risk of development of CBP [391]. In case of prostatic abscess, both drainage and conservative treatment strategies appear feasible [392]; however, the abscess size may matter. In one study, conservative treatment was successful if the abscess cavities were < 1 cm in diameter, while larger abscesses were better treated by single aspiration or continuous drainage [393]. 3.11.5.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the disease management of bacterial prostatitis Summary of evidenceLEThe treatment regimen for ABP is based on clinical experience and a number of uncontrolled clinical studies. For systemically ill patients with ABP, parenteral antibiotic therapy is preferable. After normalisation of infection parameters, oral therapy can be substituted and continued for a total of two to four weeks.3The role of fluoroquinolones as first-line agents for antimicrobial therapy for CBP was confirmed in a systematic review, with no significant differences between levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin and prulifloxacin in terms of microbiological eradication, clinical efficacy and adverse events.1aMetronidazole 500 mg three times daily for fourteen days was found to be efficient for eradication in 93.3% of patients with T. vaginalis CBP.1bIn patients with CBP caused by obligate intracellular pathogens, macrolides showed higher microbiological and clinical cure rates compared to fluoroquinolones.1aClinicians should consider local drug-resistance patterns when choosing antibiotics.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingAcute bacterial prostatitisTreat acute bacterial prostatitis according to the recommendations for complicated UTIs (see section 3.7.5).StrongChronic bacterial prostatitis (CBP)Prescribe a fluoroquinolone (e.g. ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin) as first-line treatment for CBP.StrongPrescribe a macrolide (e.g. azithromycin) or a tetracycline (e.g. doxycycline) if intracellular bacteria have been identified as the causative agent of CBP.StrongPrescribe metronidazole in patients with T. vaginalis CBP.Strong Table 10: Suggested regimens for antimicrobial therapy for chronic bacterial prostatitis AntimicrobialDaily doseDuration of therapyCommentsFluoroquinoloneOptimal oral daily dose4-6 weeksDoxycycline100 mg b.i.d10 daysOnly for C. trachomatis or mycoplasma infectionsAzithromycin500 mg once daily3 weeksOnly for C. trachomatis infectionsMetronidazole500 mg t.i.d.14 daysOnly for T. vaginalis infections b.i.d = twice daily; t.i.d = three times daily. 3.11.6. Follow-up In asymptomatic post-treatment patients routine urinalysis and/or urine culture is not mandatory as there are no validated tests of cure for bacterial prostatitis except for cessation of symptoms [356]. In patients with persistent symptoms and repeated positive microbiological results for sexually transmitted infectious pathogens, microbiological screening of the patient’s partner/s is recommended. Antibiotic treatments may be repeated with a more prolonged course, higher dosage and/or different compounds [356]. 