3.12. Acute Infective Epididymitis. 3.12.1. Epidemiology, Aetiology and Pathophysiology Epididymitis is a common condition with incidence ranging from 25 to 65 cases per 10,000 adult males per year and can be acute, chronic or recurrent [394]. Acute epididymitis is clinically characterised by pain, swelling and increased temperature of the epididymis, which may involve the testis and scrotal skin. It is generally caused by migration of pathogens from the urethra or bladder that can be identified by appropriate diagnostics in up to 90% of patients [395]. Torsion of the spermatic cord (testicular torsion) is the most important differential diagnosis in boys and young men. The predominant pathogens isolated are Enterobacterales (typically E. coli), C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae [396]. Men who have anal intercourse and those with abnormalities of the urinary tract resulting in bacteriuria are at higher risk of epididymitis caused by Enterobacterales [397]. The mumps virus should be considered if there are viral prodromal symptoms and salivary gland enlargement. Tuberculous epididymitis may occur, typically as chronic epididymitis, in high-risk groups such as men with immunodeficiency and those from high prevalence countries, it frequently results in a discharging scrotal sinus. Brucella or Candida spp. are rare possible pathogens. 3.12.2. Diagnostic Evaluation Culture of a mid-stream specimen of urine should be performed and any previous urine culture results should be checked. Sexually transmitted infections including C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae should be detected by NAAT on first voided urine or urethral swab. A urethral swab or smear should be performed for Gram staining and culture of N. gonorrhoeae, when available [394,398,399]. Detection of these pathogens should be reported according to local procedures. All patients with probable sexually transmitted infections (STIs) should be advised to attend an appropriate clinic to be screened for other STIs. Men with Enterobacterales may require investigation for lower urinary tract abnormalities. If tuberculous epididymitis is suspected, three sequential early morning urine samples should be cultured for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) and sent for screening by NAAT for M. tuberculosis DNA [400]. If appropriate prostate secretion, ejaculate, discharge from a draining scrotal fistula, as well as fine needle aspiration and biopsy specimens should be investigated using microscopy, AFB culture and NAAT. Scrotal ultrasound is more accurate for the diagnose of acute epididymitis than urinalysis alone [401] and may also be beneficial for the exclusion of other pathologies [402]. 3.12.3. Disease Management Men with suspected STI should be informed of the risks to others and advised not to have sex until free of infection. Empirical antimicrobial therapy has to be chosen with consideration of the most probable pathogen and degree of penetration into the inflamed epididymis and may need to be varied according to local pathogen sensitivities and guidance. Generally, both C. trachomatis and Enterobacterales should be covered initially and the regimen modified according to pathogen identification. Doxycycline and some specific fluoroquinolones have good clinical and microbiological cure rates in patients with suspected C. trachomatis or M. genitalium and both achieve adequate levels in inflamed male genital tissues with oral dosing. Macrolide antibiotics such as azithromycin are effective against C. trachomatis but have not been tested in epididymitis; however, initial pharmacokinetic studies suggest that azithromycin may effectively penetrate epididymal tissue when given in multiple doses [403]. Fluoroquinolones remain effective for oral treatment of Enterobacterales although resistance is increasing and local advice should be sought. Fluoroquinolones should not be considered for gonorrhoea. Single high parenteral dose of a third-generation cephalosporin is effective against N. gonorrhoeae; current resistance patterns and local public health recommendations should guide choice of agent. Clinical response to antibiotics in men with severe epididymitis should be assessed after approximately three days. Men with likely or proven STI should be assessed at fourteen days to check cure and ensure tracing and treatment of contacts according to local public health recommendations. 3.12.4. Evidence Summary Relating to this chapter, four guidelines based on systematic reviews were identified [306,398,404,405]. No evidence quality assessments were detailed. A high quality RCT demonstrated that a ten-day course of ciprofloxacin was superior to pivampicillin for clinical cure (80% vs. 60%) in men aged > 40 years [406]. Data from a large comparative case series suggested that young age and history of sexual activity are not sufficiently predictive of a sexually transmitted pathogen to guide antibiotic treatment in acute epididymitis [395]. Empiric antibiotic regimens from existing guidelines [306,398,404,405] and panel consensus: 1. For men with acute epididymitis at low risk of gonorrhoea (e.g. no discharge) a single agent or combination of two agents of sufficient dose and duration to eradicate C. trachomatis and Enterobacterales should be used. Appropriate options are: A. A fluoroquinolone active against C. trachomatis orally once daily for ten to fourteen days*ORB. Doxycycline 200 mg initial dose by mouth and then 100 mg twice daily for ten to fourteen days* plus an antibiotic active against Enterobacterales** for ten to fourteen days* 2. For men with likely gonorrhoeal acute epididymitis a combination regimen active against Gonococcus and C. trachomatis must be used such as: A. Ceftriaxone 1000 mg intramuscularly single dose plus doxycycline 200 mg initial dose by mouth and then 100 mg twice daily for ten to fourteen days* 3. For non-sexually active men with acute epididymitis a single agent of sufficient dose and duration to eradicate Enterobacterales should be used. Appropriate option is a fluoroquinolone by mouth once daily for ten to fourteen days* *Depending upon pathogen identification and clinical response.** A parenteral option will be required for men with severe infection requiring hospitalisation. Surgical exploration may be required to drain abscesses or debride tissue. A comparative cohort study found that lack of separation of epididymis and testis on palpation and the presence of abscess on US may predict requirement for surgery following initial antibiotic treatment [407]. A cohort study found semen parameters may be impaired during epididymitis but recovered following successful treatment [408]. Comparative clinician cohort studies suggest adherence to guidelines for assessment and treatment of epididymitis is low, particularly by urologists compared to sexual health specialists [409] and by primary care physicians [410]. 3.12.5. Screening A large cohort screening study for carriage of C. trachomatis including a randomly selected group of 5,000 men of whom 1,033 were tested showed no benefit in terms of reduction in risk of epididymitis over nine years of observation [411]. 3.12.6. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of acute infective epididymitis Summary of evidenceLEIn young sexually active patients both STIs and Enterobacterales have to be considered as aetiological agents.3In patients > 40 years antibiotic therapy with ciprofloxacin is superior to pivmecillinam.1bA negative sexual risk history does not exclude STIs in sexually active men.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingObtain a mid-stream urine and a first voided urine for pathogen identification by culture and nucleic acid amplification test.StrongInitially prescribe a single antibiotic or a combination of two antibiotics active against Chlamydia trachomatis and Enterobacterales in young sexually active men; in older men without sexual risk factors only Enterobacterales have to be considered.StrongIf gonorrhoeal infection is likely give single dose ceftriaxone 1000 mg intramuscularly or intravenously* in addition to a course of an antibiotic active against Chlamydia trachomatis.StrongAdjust antibiotic agent when pathogen has been identified and adjust duration according to clinical response.WeakFollow national policies on reporting and tracing/treatment of contacts for sexually transmitted infections.Strong *Despite the lack of RCTs there is increasing evidence that intravenous treatment with ceftriaxone is safe and effective for the treatment of gonorrhoeal infections and avoids the discomfort of an intramuscular injection for patients [345] Figure 2: Diagnostic and treatment algorithm for men with acute epididymitisi.m. = intramuscular; i.v. intravenously.* Despite the lack of RCTs there is increasing evidence that intravenous treatment with ceftriaxone is safe and effective for the treatment of gonorrhoeal infections and avoids the discomfort of an intramuscular injection for patients [345]. 