3.15. Genitourinary Tuberculosis. 3.15.1. Epidemiology, Aetiology and Pathophysiology An estimated 246,000 new and relapse tuberculosis (TB) cases occurred in the WHO European Region in 2019, with 49,752 of these cases occurring within the 31 countries comprising the European Union (EU)/European Economic Area (EEA) region [466]. An estimated 12.0% of incident TB cases in 2019 were co-infected with HIV. Extrapulmonary TB was notified on average for 16.6% of all incident TB cases in the Region. Eleven countries reported more than 30% of their TB cases having extrapulmonary localisation. The proportion of TB that is extrapulmonary is significantly greater among migrants than non-migrants. Genitourinary tuberculosis (GUTB) accounted for 4.6% of extrapulmonary TB cases in the EU between 1997-2017 [467]. Tuberculosis is an infectious disease caused by a group of Mycobacterium species called the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MBTC) [468]. Genitourinary TB can affect all genitourinary organs and is almost always secondary due to the hematogenous spread of chronic latent TB infection (LTBI) [469]. Risk factors include primary and LTBI, diabetes, old age, low BMI, oncological comorbidities, immune suppression (including HIV), renal failure and poor socioeconomic living conditions. The risk of reactivation is estimated to be up to 15% during one’s lifetime [470]. The WHO recommend either a tuberculin skin test (TST) or interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) for the diagnosis LTBI [471]. 3.15.2. Diagnosis The diagnosis of GUTB is challenging as no single diagnostic test exists. Diagnosis relies on a high suspicion of infection based on patient history; microbiological, molecular and histological testing; and imaging findings. Patients generally present with non-specific urological complaints for which no obvious cause is identified including haematuria, increased urinary frequency, difficulty voiding, abdominal, lumbar and suprapubic pain, and in female patients menstrual irregularities and pelvic pain. Patients may also present for infertility issues; however, infertility and TB will not be addressed in detail in this text. 3.15.2.1. Smear Microscopy Smear microscopy is a simple and cost-effective way of detecting the presence of acid-fast bacilli (AFB) in urine samples, semen, tissue specimens, pus, or discharged or prostatic massage fluid, through microscopic examination using Ziehl–Neelsen or auramine staining [472,473]. A major limitation of smear microscopy is its low sensitivity (ranging from 0-25%) in urine [474,475]. 3.15.2.2. Culture The culture-based method (both solid and liquid media) for biological specimens is the reference standard for M. tuberculosis isolation from biological samples. Three midstream first-void urine samples, on consecutive days, are recommended for TB culture [473]. A disadvantage of culture-based methods is the long incubation period needed for results at least 9–10 days for positive results and 6 weeks to be considered negative as well as the need for highly equipped laboratories. In addition, studies have reported high specificities of 92–100% but low sensitivities 23.3–30% for urine culture in renal TB specimens [476,477]. 3.15.2.3. Nucleic Acid Amplification Tests In recent years, nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) have been introduced in the diagnostic pathway of TB, to overcome the limits of early and rapid diagnosis and of drug susceptibility testing. In 2021 the WHO issued an update to its guidelines for the rapid diagnosis of TB in which they made a conditional recommendation that in patients with signs and symptoms of extrapulmonary TB, Xpert MTB/RIF may be used as an the initial diagnostic test [478]. Xpert MTB/RIF pooled sensitivity and specificity were 84.7% (70.8 to 93.1) and 97.3% (91.0 to 99.2) for the diagnosis of genitourinary TB [479]. The 2021 WHO guidelines also contain a number a recommendations for additional PCR testing systems as well as moderate complexity automated NAATs [478]. Note: A number of other diagnostic tests are currently under investigation by the WHO but cannot be recommended for the diagnosis of GUTB at this time. 3.15.2.4. Imaging Imaging modalities aid in the localisation of the foci of infection in GUTB and in the assessment of the extent of the damage to the genito-urinary system. Imaging techniques for the diagnosis of GUTB have a sensitivity of approx. 90% [480]. However, the quality of the evidence available for diagnostic imaging of TB is low to very-low and further studies are required to allow the Panel to make recommendations on this topic. Ultrasound is a cost-effective and non-invasive imaging modality that has been shown to be effective for the diagnosis of testicular, epididymal and vas deferens TB [481-485]. Ultrasound examination may also allow for the identification of parenchymal masses, cavities, mucosal thickening of the collecting system and bladder, stenosis and consecutive obstruction of the collecting system, vesicoureteral reflux, and calcifications [486]. In female GUTB patients US may identify ovarian masses, intrauterine thickening and calcifications [487]. Intravenous urography aids in the identification of renal and ureteral TB, but lacks specificity. Approximately 10-15% of patients may have normal findings on IVU [488,489]. The most common findings on IVU are hydrocalycosis, hydronephrosis or hydroureter due to stricture, autonephrectomy and urinary calcifications [490-492]. In recent years CT and MRI have largely replaced IUV. The most common findings on CT are parenchymal scarring, hydrocalycosis, hydronephrosis or hydroureter due to stricture, and thickening of the renal pelvis, ureter and bladder walls [490-492]. In TB of the seminal vesicles and vas deferens CT imaging can show enlarged heterogeneously enhancing seminal vesicles with possible wall thickening, contraction, and intraluminal or wall calcifications [493,494]. Prostate TB appears as a low attenuating and marginally enhancing cystic mass, which is indistinguishable from a non-TB prostatic abscess [495]. In female GUTB the fallopian tubes are most frequently affected area and present with enlargement, hydrosalpinx, pyosalpinx, and wall thickening, with calcification on CT [496]. Magnetic resonance imaging has low sensitivity for the diagnosis of GUTB in the early stages of the infection [497]. As an imaging modality MRI is useful in patients in whom CT is contraindicated, including patients with renal failure or contrast hypersensitivity reactions or those who wish to avoid exposure to radiation. Renal and ureteral abnormalities are comparable to those described for CT findings and must be distinguished from acute pyelonephritis [487,498]. Epididymitis and testicular TB appears as a diffusely enlarged epididymis or testis with heterogeneous high T2 signal due to fibrosis and calcification [494]. Multiparametric MRI of the prostate distinguishes between the nodular or diffuse patterns of prostate TB [499]. Female GUTB has a wide range of appearances on HSG affecting the fallopian tubes, endometrium and uterus [500,501]. Tubal obstruction is the most common finding with HSG [501]. In addition, deformity of the uterine cavity can be observed, such as a T-shaped and Dwarfed uterus, resulting from abnormal scaring and fibrosis [500]. As the disease progresses this process can potentially lead to a complete obliteration of the uterine cavity referred to as Netter syndrome [502]. 3.15.3. Medical Treatment The WHO recommends a daily six month regimen for treatment of newly diagnosed extrapulmonary TB, including an intensive phase of two months with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, followed by a continuation phase of four months with isoniazid and rifampicin [503]. For the treatment of multi-drug resistant (MDR) TB (i.e. resistance to rifampicin and isoniazid) an individualised treatment regime should be applied with at least five effective tuberculosis medicines during the intensive phase, including pyrazinamide and four core second-line tuberculosis medicines [504]. 3.15.4. Surgical treatment Combination drug therapy is the first-line treatment for GUTB. However, in more than 50% of patients ablative, endoscopic or reconstructive surgery is required due to the destructive nature of the infection coupled with a delay in initial diagnosis [505-507]. In 26.9% of cases of diagnosed GUTB there is a non-functioning unilateral kidney and in 7.4%, renal failure [507]. In the largest observational study of 4,288 GUTB patient’s a total of 2,364 different surgical procedures were carried out of which 948 were reconstructive [508]. In a retrospective series of 241 patients who underwent surgery for GUTB, a total of 128 reconstructive procedures were done in which 30.29% of patients had bladder augmentation [509]. A retrospective single-centre study of 128 patients reported renal units in the reconstruction group had 5.44-fold longer survival than the permanent diversion group suggesting that when feasible renal reconstruction may be better for renal function preservation [510]. Reconstructive surgery may include augmentation cystoplasty, uretero-ureterostomy, ureteroneocystostomy, ureteral reimplant, pyeloplasty, ureterocalicostomy and ileal ureter or external diversion, where indicated [511]. There is limited evidence with regard to the optimum surgical approach. Minimally invasive options, have been reported as feasible and safe strategies, comparable to open surgery [512-516]. In addition, the optimal timing for surgery is controversial. A delay of 2-6 weeks up to 9 months after the initiation of medical treatment has been proposed to allow for a reduction in active inflammation and stabilisation of the TB lesions [497]. Due to lack of high-quality evidence for surgical treatment of GUTB the Panel are unable to give a recommendation on surgical treatment at this point in time. Patients with GUTB should be assessed on an individualised bases and the decision to operate taken depending on the location, extent of disease progression and damage to the genitourinary system. 3.15.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of GUTB Summary of evidenceLEThe risk of reactivation of latent TB is estimated to be 15% in an individual’s lifetime.2aSmear microscopy for acid-fast bacilli has a low sensitivity in urine ranging from 0-25%.2aStudies have reported high specificities of 92–100% but low sensitivities of 23.3–30% for urine culture in renal TB specimens.2aXpert MTB/RIF pooled sensitivity and specificity were 84.7% (70.8 to 93.1) and 97.3% (91.0 to 99.2) for the diagnosis of GUTB.1bStandard six month anti-tuberculous drug regimens are effective in all forms of TB (pulmonary and extrapulmonary).1aThere is limited evidence with regard to the optimum surgical approach and timing of surgery in GUTB patients.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingDiagnosisTake a full medical history including history of previous tuberculosis infection (pulmonary and extrapulmonary) form all patients presenting with persistent non-specific genitourinary symptoms and no identifiable cause.StrongPerform smear microscopy on urine, semen, tissue specimens, discharged or prostatic massage fluid using Ziehl–Neelsen (ZN) or auramine staining in patients with suspected genitourinary tuberculosis (GUTB).WeakPerform acid-fact bacilli culture on three midstream first-void urine samples, on three consecutive days for M. tuberculosis isolation in patients with suspected GUTB.StrongUse a recommended PCR test systems in addition to microbiological reference standard (MRS) in urine specimens as a diagnostic test in patients with signs and symptoms of GUTB.WeakUse imaging modalities in combination with culture and/or PCR to aid in the diagnosis of GUTB and to assess the location and extent of damage to the genitourinary system.WeakTreatmentUse medical treatment as first-line treatment for GUTB.StrongUse a daily six-month regimen for treatment of newly diagnosed GUTB this should include an intensive phase of two months with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol. Followed by a continuation phase of four-months with isoniazid and rifampicin.StrongTreat multi-drug resistant TB with an individualised treatment regime including at least five effective tuberculosis medicines during the intensive phase, including pyrazinamide and four core second-line tuberculosis medicines.Strong Table 12: Treatment regimens for newly diagnosed GUTB and MDR-TB [504] AntimicrobialsDosageSix month regimen for treatment of newly diagnosed GUTBIntensive two month phaseIsoniazid5 mg/kg every 24 h; max daily dosage 300 mgRifampicin10 mg/kg every 24 h; max daily dosage 600 mgPyrazinamide25 mg/kg every 24 h; max daily dosage 2000 mgEthambutol15–20 mg/kg every 24 h; max daily dosage ranging from 800 mg to 1600 mg depending on body weightContinuation four month phaseIsoniazid5 mg/kg every 24 h; max daily dosage 300 mgRifampicin10 mg/kg every 24 h; max daily dosage 600 mgTreatment regimen for multi-drug resistant TBTreat multi-drug resistant TB with an individualised treatment regime including at least five effective tuberculosis medicines during the intensive phase, including pyrazinamide and four core second-line tuberculosis medicines*.Group AFluoroquinolonesLevofloxacin, Moxifloxacin and GatifloxacinGroup BSecond-line injectablesAmikacin, Capreomycin, Kanamycin and Streptomycin**Group COther second-line agentsEthionamide/ Prothionamide, Cycloserine/Terizidone, Linezolid and ClofazimineGroup DAdd-on agents (not part of the core MDR-TB regime)D1: Pyrazinamide, Ethambutol, and High-dose isoniazidD2: Bedaquiline and DelamamidD3: p-aminosalicylic acid, Imipenem-cilastatin, Meropenem, Amoxicillin-clavulanate and Thioacetazone*** * Drugs should be chosen as follows: 1 from group A, 1 from group B, and at least 2 from group C. If the minimum number of five TB medicines cannot be composed from drugs included in Groups A to C, an agent from group D2 and other agents from group D3 may be added to bring the total to five [504]**Streptomycin can substitute other injectable drugs if none of these agents can be used and if the strain is shown not to be resistant [504]***Thioacetazone should not be used if the patient is HIV seropositive [504] 