3.2. Antimicrobial Stewardship. Although the benefits to patients of antibiotic use are clear, overuse and misuse have contributed to the growing problem of resistance amongst uropathogenic bacteria, which is a serious threat to public health [12,13]. In acute care hospitals, 20-50% of prescribed antibiotics are either unnecessary or inappropriate [14]. In response, a worldwide initiative seeks to incorporate Antimicrobial Stewardship programs in healthcare [15]. Antimicrobial Stewardship aims to optimise clinical outcomes and ensure cost-effective therapy whilst minimising unintended consequences of antimicrobial use such as healthcare associated infections including Clostridioides difficile, toxicity, selection of virulent organisms and emergence of resistant bacterial strains [16]. Stewardship programs have two main sets of actions. The first set mandates use of recommended care at the patient level conforming to guidelines. The second set describes strategies to achieve adherence to the mandated guidance. These include persuasive actions such as education and feedback together with restricting availability linked to local formularies. A Cochrane Review of effectiveness of interventions to improve antibiotic prescribing practices for hospital inpatients, updated in 2017, found high-certainty evidence that such interventions are effective in increasing adherence with antibiotic policy leading to reduced antibiotic treatment duration and that it may also reduce hospital stay. The review found no evidence that reduced antibiotic usage increased mortality [17].  The important components of antimicrobial stewardship programs are [18]: regular training of staff in best use of antimicrobial agents;adherence to local, national or international guidelines;regular ward visits and consultation with infectious diseases physicians and clinical microbiologists;audit of adherence and treatment outcomes;regular monitoring and feedback to prescribers of their performance and local pathogen resistance profiles. A 2016 systematic review of evidence for effectiveness of various Antimicrobial Stewardship interventions in healthcare institutions identified 145 studies of nine Stewardship objectives. Guideline-driven empirical therapy using a restricted choice of antibiotics and including de-escalation, intravenous to oral switch, therapeutic drug monitoring, and bedside consultation resulted in a 35% (95% CI 20-46%) relative risk reduction (RRR) in mortality. Use of de-escalation (tailoring to a more narrow spectrum agent), showed a RRR of 56% (95% CI 34 – 70%) for mortality [19]. To facilitate local initiatives and audit, a set of valid, reliable, and applicable indicators of the quality of antibiotic use in the treatment of hospitalised patients with complicated UTI was developed [20]. Its use in the Netherlands appeared to result in shortened hospital stay [21]. A literature search of Pubmed from April 2014 [19], to February 2017 identified no further randomised controlled trials (RCTs) relating to stewardship programmes for UTIs. Studies to provide high-quality evidence of effectiveness of Stewardship programmes in urology patients are urgently needed. 