3.4. Uncomplicated cystitis. 3.4.1. Introduction Uncomplicated cystitis is defined as acute, sporadic or recurrent cystitis limited to non-pregnant women with no known relevant anatomical and functional abnormalities within the urinary tract or comorbidities. 3.4.2. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Almost half of all women will experience at least one episode of cystitis during their lifetime. Nearly one in three women will have had at least one episode of cystitis by the age of 24 years [114]. Risk factors include sexual intercourse, use of spermicides, a new sexual partner, a mother with a history of UTI and a history of UTI during childhood. The majority of cases of uncomplicated cystitis are caused by E. coli. 3.4.3. Diagnostic evaluation 3.4.3.1. Clinical diagnosis The diagnosis of uncomplicated cystitis can be made with a high probability based on a focused history of lower urinary tract symptoms (dysuria, frequency and urgency) and the absence of vaginal discharge [115,116]. In elderly women genitourinary symptoms are not necessarily related to cystitis [117,118]. 3.4.3.2. Differential diagnosis Uncomplicated cystitis should be differentiated from ABU, which is considered not to be infection but rather a commensal colonisation, which should not be treated and therefore not screened for, except if it is considered a risk factor in clearly defined situations (see section 3.3). 3.4.3.3. Laboratory diagnosis In patients presenting with typical symptoms of an uncomplicated cystitis urine analysis (i.e. urine culture, dip stick testing, etc.) leads only to a minimal increase in diagnostic accuracy [119]. However, if the diagnosis is unclear dipstick analysis can increase the likelihood of an uncomplicated cystitis diagnosis [120,121]. Taking a urine culture is recommended in patients with atypical symptoms, as well as those who fail to respond to appropriate antimicrobial therapy [122,123]. 3.4.3.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnostic evaluation of uncomplicated cystitis Summary of evidenceLEAn accurate diagnosis of uncomplicated cystitis can be based on a focused history of lower urinary tract symptoms and the absence of vaginal discharge or irritation.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingDiagnose uncomplicated cystitis in women who have no other risk factors for complicated urinary tract infections based on:a focused history of lower urinary tract symptoms (dysuria, frequency and urgency);the absence of vaginal discharge.StrongUse urine dipstick testing for diagnosis of acute uncomplicated cystitis.WeakUrine cultures should be done in the following situations:suspected acute pyelonephritis;symptoms that do not resolve or recur within four weeks after completion of treatment;women who present with atypical symptoms;pregnant women.Strong 3.4.4. Disease management Antimicrobial therapy is recommended because clinical success is significantly more likely in women treated with antimicrobials compared with placebo [124]. In female patients with mild to moderate symptoms, symptomatic therapy (e.g. Ibuprofen, phytotherapy), as an alternative to antimicrobial treatment, may be considered in consultation with individual patients [125-129]. The choice of antimicrobial therapy should be guided by [115]: spectrum and susceptibility patterns of the aetiological pathogens;efficacy for the particular indication in clinical studies;tolerability and adverse reactions;adverse ecological effects;costs;availability. According to these principles and the available susceptibility patterns in Europe, oral treatment with fosfomycin trometamol 3 g single dose, pivmecillinam 400 mg three times a day for three to five days, and nitrofurantoin (e.g. nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals 100 mg twice daily for five days), should be considered for first-line treatment, when available [130-133]. Alternative antimicrobials include trimethoprim alone or combined with a sulphonamide. Co-trimoxazole (160/800 mg twice daily for three days) or trimethoprim (200 mg twice daily for five days) should only be considered as drugs of first choice in areas with known resistance rates for E. coli of < 20% [134,135]. Aminopenicillins are no longer suitable for empirical therapy because of worldwide high E. coli resistance. Aminopenicillins in combination with a beta-lactamase inhibitor such as ampicillin/sulbactam or amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and oral cephalosporins are not recommended for empirical therapy due to ecological collateral damage, but may be used in selected cases [136,137]. Important note: On 11th March 2019, the European Commission implemented stringent regulatory conditions regarding the use of fluoroquinolones due to their disabling and potentially long-lasting side effects [138]. This legally binding decision is applicable in all EU countries. National authorities have been urged to enforce this ruling and to take all appropriate measures to promote the correct use of this class of antibiotics. In uncomplicated cystitis a fluoroquinolone should only be used when it is considered inappropriate to use other antibacterial agents that are commonly recommended for the treatment of these infections [138]. 3.4.4.1. Cystitis in pregnancy Short courses of antimicrobial therapy can also be considered for treatment of cystitis in pregnancy [139], but not all antimicrobials are suitable during pregnancy. In general, penicillins, cephalosporins, fosfomycin, nitrofurantoin (not in case of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and during the end of pregnancy), trimethoprim (not in the first trimenon) and sulphonamides (not in the last trimenon), can be considered. 3.4.4.2. Cystitis in men Cystitis in men without involvement of the prostate is uncommon and should be classed as a complicated infection. Therefore, treatment with antimicrobials penetrating into the prostate tissue is needed in males with symptoms of UTI. A treatment duration of at least seven days is recommended, preferably with trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole or a fluoroquinolone if in accordance with susceptibility testing (see section 3.4.4.4) [140]. 3.4.4.3. Renal insufficiency In patients with renal insufficiency the choice of antimicrobials may be influenced by decreased renal excretion; however, most antimicrobials, have a wide therapeutic index. No adjustment of dose is necessary until glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is < 20 mL/min, with the exception of antimicrobials with nephrotoxic potential, e.g. aminoglycosides. The combination of loop diuretics (e.g. furosemide) and a cephalosporin is nephrotoxic. Nitrofurantoin is contraindicated in patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of less than 30 ml/min/1.73m2 as accumulation of the drug leads to increased side effects as well as reduced urinary tract recovery, with the risk of treatment failure [141]. 3.4.4.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for antimicrobial therapy for uncomplicated cystitis Summary of evidenceLEClinical success for the treatment of uncomplicated cystitis is significantly more likely in women treated with antimicrobials than placebo.1bAminopenicillins are no longer suitable for antimicrobial therapy in uncomplicated cystitis because of negative ecological effects, high resistance rates and their increased selection for extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing bacteria.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPrescribe fosfomycin trometamol, pivmecillinam or nitrofurantoin as first-line treatment for uncomplicated cystitis in women.StrongDo not use aminopenicillins or fluoroquinolones to treat uncomplicated cystitis.Strong Table 1: Suggested regimens for antimicrobial therapy in uncomplicated cystitis AntimicrobialDaily doseDuration of therapyCommentsFirst-line womenFosfomycin trometamol3 g SD1 dayRecommended only in women with uncomplicated cystitis.Nitrofurantoin macrocrystal50-100 mg four times a day5 daysNitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals100 mg b.i.d5 daysNitrofurantoin macrocrystal prolonged release100 mg b.i.d5 daysPivmecillinam400 mg t.i.d3-5 daysAlternativesCephalosporins(e.g. cefadroxil)500 mg b.i.d3 daysOr comparableIf the local resistance pattern for E. coli is < 20%Trimethoprim200 mg b.i.d5 daysNot in the first trimenon of pregnancyTrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole160/800 mg b.i.d3 daysNot in the last trimenon of pregnancyTreatment in menTrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole160/800 mg b.i.d7 daysRestricted to men, fluoroquinolones can also be prescribed in accordance with local susceptibility testing. SD = single dose; b.i.d = twice daily; t.i.d = three times daily. 3.4.5. Follow-up Routine post-treatment urinalysis or urine cultures in asymptomatic patients are not indicated [25]. In women whose symptoms do not resolve by end of treatment, and in those whose symptoms resolve but recur within two weeks, urine culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing should be performed [142]. For therapy in this situation, one should assume that the infecting organism is not susceptible to the agent originally used. Retreatment with a seven-day regimen using another agent should be considered [142]. 