3.6. Uncomplicated pyelonephritis. Uncomplicated pyelonephritis is defined as pyelonephritis limited to non-pregnant, pre-menopausal women with no known relevant urological abnormalities or comorbidities. 3.6.1. Diagnostic evaluation 3.6.1.1. Clinical diagnosis Pyelonephritis is suggested by fever (> 38°C), chills, flank pain, nausea, vomiting, or costovertebral angle tenderness, with or without the typical symptoms of cystitis [207]. Pregnant women with acute pyelonephritis need special attention, as this kind of infection may not only have an adverse effect on the mother with anaemia, renal and respiratory insufficiency, but also on the unborn child with more frequent pre-term labour and birth [208]. 3.6.1.2. Differential diagnosis It is vital to differentiate as soon as possible between uncomplicated and complicated mostly obstructive pyelonephritis, as the latter can rapidly lead to urosepsis. This differential diagnosis should be made by the appropriate imaging technique (see section 3.6.1.4). 3.6.1.3. Laboratory diagnosis Urinalysis including the assessment of white and red blood cells and nitrite, is recommended for routine diagnosis [209]. In addition, urine culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing should be performed in all cases of pyelonephritis. 3.6.1.4. Imaging diagnosis Evaluation of the upper urinary tract with ultrasound (US) should be performed to rule out urinary tract obstruction or renal stone disease in patients with a history of urolithiasis, renal function disturbances or a high urine pH [210]. Additional investigations, such as a contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan, or excretory urography should be considered if the patient remains febrile after 72 hours of treatment, or immediately if there is deterioration in clinical status [210]. For diagnosis of complicating factors in pregnant women, US or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be used preferentially to avoid radiation risk to the foetus [210]. 3.6.2. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnostic evaluation of uncomplicated pyelonephritis Summary of evidenceLEUrine culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing should be performed in all cases of pyelonephritis in addition to urinalysis.4A prospective observational cohort study found that radiologic imaging can selectively be applied in adults with febrile UTI without loss of clinically relevant information by using a simple clinical prediction rule.2bAdditional imaging investigations, such as an unenhanced helical computed tomography should be done if the patient remains febrile after 72 hours of treatment or in patients with suspected complications e.g. sepsis.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform urinalysis (e.g. using the dipstick method), including the assessment of white and red blood cells and nitrite, for routine diagnosis.StrongPerform urine culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing in patients with pyelonephritis.StrongPerform imaging of the urinary tract to exclude urgent urological disorders.Strong 3.6.3. Disease management 3.6.3.1. Outpatient treatment Fluoroquinolones and cephalosporines are the only antimicrobial agents that can be recommended for oral empirical treatment of uncomplicated pyelonephritis [211]. However, oral cephalosporines achieve significantly lower blood and urinary concentrations than intravenous cephalosporines. Other agents such as nitrofurantoin, oral fosfomycin, and pivmecillinam should be avoided as there is insufficient data regarding their efficacy [212]. In the setting of fluoroquinolone hypersensitivity or known resistance, other acceptable choices include trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg) or an oral beta-lactam, if the uropathogen is known to be susceptible. If such agents are used in the absence of antimicrobial susceptibility results, an initial intravenous dose of a long-acting parenteral antimicrobial (e.g. ceftriaxone) should be administered. A short outpatient antibiotic course of treatment, for acute pyelonephritis, has been shown to be equivalent to longer durations of therapy in terms of clinical and microbiological success. However, this is associated with a higher recurrence rate of infection within four to six weeks and needs to be tailored to local policies and resistance patterns [213]. 3.6.3.2. Inpatient treatment Patients with uncomplicated pyelonephritis requiring hospitalisation should be treated initially with an intravenous antimicrobial regimen e.g. a fluoroquinolone, an aminoglycoside (with or without ampicillin), or an extended-spectrum cephalosporin or penicillin [214]. Ceftolozane/tazobactam achieved a clinical response rate of over 90% in patients with uncomplicated pyelonephritis [215,216]. It also demonstrated significantly higher composite cure rates than levofloxacin among levofloxacin-resistant pathogens [217]. Ceftazidime-avibactam combination has been shown to be effective for treating ceftazidime-resistant Enterobacterales and Pseudomonas aeruginosa UTIs [218]. Novel antimicrobial agents include imipenem/cilastatin, cefiderocol, meropenem-vaborbactam and plazomicin. Imipenem/cilastatin has been investigated in a phase 2 randomised trial and showed good clinical response rates [219]. Cefatazidime-avibactam and doripenem showed similar efficacy against ceftazidime non-susceptible pathogens and may offer an alternative to carbapenems in this setting [220]. Meropenem-vaborbactam has been shown to be non-inferior to piperacillin-tazobactam in a phase 3 RCT [221]. It was also effective for treating carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales with cure rates of 65% compared to best available treatment [222]. Once daily plazomicin was non-inferior to meropenem for the treatment of cUTIs and acute pyelonephritis caused by Enterobacterales, including multidrug-resistant strains [223]. Cefiderocol was non-inferior to imipenem/cilastatin for the treatment of complicated UTI in people with multidrug-resistant Gram-negative infections in a phase 2 RCT [224]. Carbapenems and novel broad spectrum antimicrobial agents should only be considered in patients with early culture results indicating the presence of multi-drug resistant organisms. The choice between these agents should be based on local resistance patterns and optimised on the basis of drug susceptibility results. In patients presenting with signs of urosepsis empiric antimicrobial coverage for ESBL-producing organisms is warranted [225]. Patients initially treated with parenteral therapy who improve clinically and can tolerate oral fluids may transition to oral antimicrobial therapy [226]. 3.6.3.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the treatment of uncomplicated pyelonephritis Summary of evidenceLEFluoroquinolones and cephalosporines are the only microbial agents that can be recommended for oral empirical treatment of uncomplicated pyelonephritis.1bIntravenous antimicrobial regimens for uncomplicated pyelonephritis may include a fluoroquinolone, an aminoglycoside (with or without ampicillin), or an extended-spectrum cephalosporin or penicillin.1bCarbapenems should only be considered in patients with early culture results indicating the presence of multi-drug resistant organisms.4The appropriate antimicrobial should be chosen based on local resistance patterns and optimised on the basis of drug susceptibility results.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingTreat patients with uncomplicated pyelonephritis not requiring hospitalisation with short course fluoroquinolones as first-line treatment.StrongTreat patients with uncomplicated pyelonephritis requiring hospitalisation with an intravenous antimicrobial regimen initially.StrongSwitch patients initially treated with parenteral therapy, who improve clinically and can tolerate oral fluids, to oral antimicrobial therapy.StrongDo not use nitrofurantoin, oral fosfomycin, and pivmecillinam to treat uncomplicated pyelonephritis.Strong Table 3: Suggested regimens for empirical oral antimicrobial therapy in uncomplicated pyelonephritis AntimicrobialDaily doseDuration of therapyCommentsCiprofloxacin500-750 mg b.i.d7 daysFluoroquinolone resistance should be less than 10%.Levofloxacin750 mg q.d5 daysTrimethoprim sulfamethoxazol160/800 mg b.i.d14 daysIf such agents are used empirically, an initial intravenous dose of a long-acting parenteral antimicrobial (e.g. ceftriaxone) should be administered.Cefpodoxime200 mg b.i.d10 daysCeftibuten400 mg q.d10 days b.i.d = twice daily; q.d = every day. Table 4: Suggested regimens for empirical parenteral antimicrobial therapy in uncomplicated pyelonephritis AntimicrobialsDaily doseCommentsFirst-line treatmentCiprofloxacin400 mg b.i.dLevofloxacin750 mg q.dCefotaxime2 g t.i.dNot studied as monotherapy in acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis.Ceftriaxone1-2 g q.dLower dose studied, but higher dose recommended.Second-line treatmentCefepime1-2 g b.i.dLower dose studied, but higher dose recommended.Piperacillin/tazobactam2.5-4.5 g t.i.dGentamicin5 mg/kg q.dNot studied as monotherapy in acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis.Amikacin15 mg/kg q.dLast-line alternativesImipenem/cilastatin0.5 g t.i.dConsider only in patients with early culture results indicating the presence of multi-drug resistant organisms.Meropenem1 g t.i.dCeftolozane/tazobactam1.5 g t.i.dCeftazidime/avibactam2.5 g t.i.dCefiderocol2g t.i.dMeropenem-vaborbactam2g t.i.dPlazomicin15mg/kg o.d b.i.d = twice daily; t.i.d = three times daily; q.d = every day; o.d = once daily. In pregnant women with pyelonephritis, outpatient management with appropriate parenteral antimicrobials may also be considered, provided symptoms are mild and close follow-up is feasible [227,228]. In more severe cases of pyelonephritis, hospitalisation and supportive care are usually required. After clinical improvement parenteral therapy can also be switched to oral therapy for a total treatment duration of seven to ten days. In men with febrile UTI, pyelonephritis, or recurrent infection, or whenever a complicating factor is suspected a minimum treatment duration of two weeks is recommended, preferably with a fluoroquinolone since prostatic involvement is frequent [229]. 3.6.4. Follow-up Post-treatment urinalysis or urine cultures in asymptomatic patients post-therapy are not indicated. 