3.7. Complicated UTIs. 3.7.1. Introduction Complicated UTI (cUTI) occurs in an individual in whom factors related to the host (e.g. underlying diabetes or immunosuppression) or specific anatomical or functional abnormalities related to the urinary tract (e.g. obstruction, incomplete voiding due to detrusor muscle dysfunction) are believed to result in an infection that will be more difficult to eradicate than an uncomplicated infection [230-232]. New insights into the management of cUTIs also suggest to consider infections caused by multi-drug resistant uropathogens [233]. The underlying factors that are generally accepted to result in a cUTI are outlined in Table 5. The designation of cUTI encompasses a wide variety of underlying conditions that result in a remarkably heterogeneous patient population. Therefore, it is readily apparent that a universal approach to the evaluation and treatment of cUTIs is not sufficient, although there are general principles of management that can be applied to the majority of patients with cUTIs. The following recommendations are based on the Stichting Werkgroep Antibioticabeleid (SWAB) Guidelines from the Dutch Working Party on Antibiotic Policy [234]. Table 5: Common factors associated with complicated UTIs [233-236] Obstruction at any site in the urinary tractUTI in malesForeign bodyPregnancyIncomplete voidingDiabetes mellitusVesicoureteral refluxImmunosuppressionRecent history of instrumentationHealthcare-associated infectionsIsolated ESBL-producing organismsIsolated multi-drug resistant organisms 3.7.2. Diagnostic evaluation 3.7.2.1. Clinical presentation A cUTI is associated with clinical symptoms (e.g. dysuria, urgency, frequency, flank pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, suprapubic pain and fever), although in some clinical situations the symptoms may be atypical for example, in NLUTD, CA-UTI or patients who have undergone radical cystectomy with urinary diversion. In addition, all patients with nephrostomy may have an atypical clinical presentation. Clinical presentation can vary from severe obstructive acute pyelonephritis with imminent urosepsis to a post-operative CA-UTI, which might disappear spontaneously as soon as the catheter is removed. Clinicians must also recognise that symptoms, especially lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), are not only caused by UTIs but also by other urological disorders, such as, for example, bladder outlet obstruction and autonomic dysfunction in patients with spinal lesions and NLUTD. Concomitant medical conditions, such as diabetes mellitus and renal failure, which can be related to urological abnormalities, are often also present in a cUTI. 3.7.2.2. Urine culture Laboratory urine culture is the recommended method to determine the presence or absence of clinically significant bacteriuria in patients suspected of having a cUTI. 3.7.3. Microbiology (spectrum and antimicrobial resistance) A broad range of micro-organisms cause cUTIs. The spectrum is much larger than in uncomplicated UTIs and the bacteria are more likely to be resistant (especially in treatment-related cUTI) than those isolated in uncomplicated UTIs [235,236]. E. coli, Proteus spp., Klebsiella spp., Pseudomonas spp., Serratia spp. and Enterococcus spp. are the most common species found in cultures. Enterobacterales predominate (60-75%), with E. coli as the most common pathogen; particularly if the UTI is a first infection. Otherwise, the bacterial spectrum may vary over time and from one hospital to another [237]. 3.7.4. General principles of cUTI treatment Appropriate management of the urological abnormality or the underlying complicating factor is mandatory. Optimal antimicrobial therapy for cUTI depends on the severity of illness at presentation, as well as local resistance patterns and specific host factors (such as allergies). In addition, urine culture and susceptibility testing should be performed, and initial empirical therapy should be tailored and followed by (oral) administration of an appropriate antimicrobial agent on the basis of the isolated uropathogen. 3.7.4.1. Choice of antimicrobials Considering the current resistance percentages of amoxicillin, co-amoxiclav, trimethoprim and trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole, it can be concluded that these agents are not suitable for the empirical treatment of pyelonephritis in a normal host and, therefore, also not for treatment of all cUTIs [238]. The same applies to ciprofloxacin and other fluoroquinolones in urological patients [238]. Patients with a UTI with systemic symptoms requiring hospitalisation should be initially treated with an intravenous antimicrobial regimen, such as an aminoglycoside with or without amoxicillin, or a second or third generation cephalosporin, or an extended-spectrum penicillin with or without an aminoglycoside [234]. The choice between these agents should be based on local resistance data, and the regimen should be tailored on the basis of susceptibility results [212]. These recommendations are not only suitable for pyelonephritis, but for all other cUTIs. Alternative regimens for the treatment of cUTIs, particularly those caused by multidrug-resistant pathogens have been studied. Ceftolozane/tazobactam 1.5 g every eight hours demonstrated high clinical cure rates for cUTIs caused by ESBL-producing Enterobacterales in a pooled analysis of phase 3 clinical trials [239]. Cefiderocol (2 g) three times daily was non-inferior to imipenem-cilastatin (1 g) three times daily for the treatment of cUTI in patients with multidrug-resistant Gram-negative infections [224]. Imipenem/cilastatin plus relebactam (250 or 125 mg) was as effective as imipenem/cilastatin alone for treatment of cUTI in a phase 2 RCT [219]. Ceftazidime/avibactam has been shown to be as effective as carbapenems for the treatment of cUTI in a systematic review reporting a baseline of 25% for ESBL-producing Enterobacterales, but more severe adverse events were reported in the ceftazidime/avibactam group [240]. Once-daily plazomicin was shown to be non-inferior to meropenem for the treatment of cUTIs caused by Enterobacterales, including multidrug-resistant strains [223]. In view of the high degree of resistance, particularly among patients admitted to the department of urology, fluoroquinolones are not automatically suitable as empirical antimicrobial therapy, especially when the patient has used ciprofloxacin in the last six months [241]. Fluoroquinolones can only be recommended as empirical treatment when the patient is not seriously ill and it is considered safe to start initial oral treatment or if the patient has had an anaphylactic reaction to beta-lactam antimicrobials. Intravenous levofloxacin 750 mg once daily for five days has been shown to be non-inferior to a seven to fourteen days regimen of levofloxacin 500 mg once daily starting intravenously and switched to an oral regimen (based on mitigation of clinical symptoms) [242]. 3.7.4.2. Duration of antimicrobial therapy Treatment for seven [243] to fourteen days (for men fourteen days when prostatitis cannot be excluded) [244], is generally recommended, but the duration should be closely related to the treatment of the underlying abnormality. When the patient is hemodynamically stable and afebrile for at least 48 hours, a shorter treatment duration (e.g. seven days) may be considered in patients where a short-course treatment is desired due to relative-contraindications to the administered antibiotic [242]. 3.7.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the treatment of complicated UTIs Summary of evidenceLEPatients with a UTI with systemic symptoms requiring hospitalisation should be initially treated with an intravenous antimicrobial regimen chosen based on local resistance data and previous urine culture results from the patient, if available. The regimen should be tailored on the basis of susceptibility result.1bIf the prevalence of fluoroquinolone resistance is thought to be < 10% and the patient has contraindications for third generation cephalosporins or an aminoglycoside, ciprofloxacin can be prescribed as an empirical treatment in women with complicated pyelonephritis.2In the event of hypersensitivity to penicillin a cephalosporins can still be prescribed, unless the patient has had systemic anaphylaxis in the past.2In patients with a cUTI with systemic symptoms, empirical treatment should cover ESBL if there is an increased likelihood of ESBL infection based on prevalence in the community, earlier collected cultures and prior antimicrobial exposure of the patient.2Intravenous levofloxacin 750 mg once daily for five days, is non-inferior to a seven to fourteen day regimen of levofloxacin 500 mg once daily starting intravenously and switched to an oral regimen (based on mitigation of clinical symptoms).2 RecommendationsStrength ratingUse the combination of:amoxicillin plus an aminoglycoside;a second-generation cephalosporin plus an aminoglycoside;a third-generation cephalosporin intravenously as empirical treatment of complicated UTI with systemic symptoms.StrongOnly use ciprofloxacin provided that the local resistance percentages are < 10% when;the entire treatment is given orally;patients do not require hospitalisation;patient has an anaphylaxis for beta-lactam antimicrobials.StrongDo not use ciprofloxacin and other fluoroquinolones for the empirical treatment of complicated UTI in patients from urology departments or when patients have used fluoroquinolones in the last six months.StrongManage any urological abnormality and/or underlying complicating factors.Strong 