3.9. Urosepsis. 3.9.1. Introduction Patients with urosepsis should be diagnosed at an early stage, especially in the case of a cUTI. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), characterised by fever or hypothermia, leukocytosis or leukopenia, tachycardia and tachypnoea, has been recognised as a set of alerting symptoms [280,281]; however, SIRS is no longer included in the recent terminology of sepsis (Table 6) [11]. Mortality is considerably increased the more severe the sepsis is. The treatment of urosepsis involves adequate life-supporting care, appropriate and prompt antimicrobial therapy, adjunctive measures and the optimal management of urinary tract disorders [282]. Source control by decompression of any obstruction and drainage of larger abscesses in the urinary tract is essential [282]. Urologists are recommended to treat patients in collaboration with intensive care and infectious diseases specialists. Urosepsis is seen in both community-acquired and healthcare associated infections. Nosocomial urosepsis may be reduced by measures used to prevent nosocomial infection, e.g. reduction of hospital stay, early removal of indwelling urinary catheters, avoidance of unnecessary urethral catheterisation, correct use of closed catheter systems, and attention to simple daily aseptic techniques to avoid cross-infection. Sepsis is diagnosed when clinical evidence of infection is accompanied by signs of systemic inflammation, presence of symptoms of organ dysfunction and persistent hypotension associated with tissue anoxia (Table 6). 3.9.2. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Urinary tract infections can manifest from bacteriuria with limited clinical symptoms to sepsis or severe sepsis, depending on localised and potential systemic extension. It is important to note that a patient can move from an almost harmless state to severe sepsis in a very short time. Mortality rates associated with sepsis vary depending on the organ source [283] with urinary tract sepsis generally having a lower mortality than that from other sources [284]. Sepsis is more common in men than in women [285]. In recent years, the overall incidence of sepsis arising from all sources has increased by 8.7% per year [283], but the associated mortality has decreased, which suggests improved management of patients (total in-hospital mortality rate fell from 27.8% to 17.9% from 1995 to 2000) [286]. Although the rate of sepsis due to Gram-positive and fungal organisms has increased, Gram-negative bacteria remain predominant in urosepsis [277,287]. In urosepsis, as in other types of sepsis, the severity depends mostly upon the host response. Patients who are more likely to develop urosepsis include elderly patients, diabetics, immunosuppressed patients, such as transplant recipients and patients receiving cancer chemotherapy or corticosteroids. Urosepsis also depends on local factors, such as urinary tract calculi, obstruction at any level in the urinary tract, congenital uropathy, NLUTD, or endoscopic manoeuvres. However, all patients can be affected by bacterial species that are capable of inducing inflammation within the urinary tract. Patients who are more likely to develop urosepsis include elderly patients, diabetics, immunosuppressed patients, such as transplant recipients and patients receiving cancer chemotherapy or corticosteroids. Urosepsis also depends on local factors, such as urinary tract calculi, obstruction at any level in the urinary tract, congenital uropathy, neurogenic bladder disorders, or endoscopic manoeuvres. However, all patients can be affected by bacterial species that are capable of inducing inflammation within the urinary tract. 3.9.3. Diagnostic evaluation For diagnosis of systemic symptoms in sepsis either the full Sequential [Sepsis-related] Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score, or the quickSOFA score should be applied (Table 6). Microbiology sampling should be applied to urine, two sets of blood cultures [288], and if appropriate drainage fluids. Imaging investigations, such as sonography and CT-scan should be performed early [289]. Table 6: Definition and criteria of sepsis and septic shock [11, 280, 281] DisorderDefinitionSepsisLife-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection. For clinical application, organ dysfunction can be represented by an increase in the Sequential [Sepsis-related] Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score of 2 points or more. For rapid identification a quickSOFA (qSOFA) score was developed: respiratory rate of 22/min or greater, altered mentation, or systolic blood pressure of 100 mmHg or less.Septic shockSeptic shock should be defined as a subset of sepsis in which particularly profound circulatory, cellular, and metabolic abnormalities are associated with a greater risk of mortality than with sepsis alone. Patients with septic shock can be clinically identified by a vasopressor requirement to maintain a mean arterial pressure of 65 mmHg or greater and serum lactate level greater than 2 mmol/L (>18 mg/dL) in the absence of hypovolemia. 3.9.4. Physiology and biochemical markers E. coli remains the most prevalent micro-organism. In several countries, bacterial strains can be resistant or multi-resistant and therefore difficult to treat [287]. Most commonly, the condition develops in compromised patients (e.g. those with diabetes or immunosuppression), with typical signs of generalised sepsis associated with local signs of infection. 3.9.4.1. Cytokines as markers of the septic response Cytokines are involved in the pathogenesis of sepsis [284]. They are molecules that regulate the amplitude and duration of the host inflammatory response. They are released from various cells including monocytes, macrophages and endothelial cells, in response to various infectious stimuli. The complex balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory responses is modified in severe sepsis. An immunosuppressive phase follows the initial pro-inflammatory mechanism. Sepsis may indicate an immune system that is severely compromised and unable to eradicate pathogens or a non-regulated and excessive activation of inflammation, or both. Genetic predisposition is a probable explanation of sepsis in several patients. Mechanisms of organ failure and death in patients with sepsis remain only partially understood [284]. 3.9.4.2. Biochemical markers Procalcitonin is the inactive pro-peptide of calcitonin. Normally, levels are undetectable in healthy humans. During severe generalised infections (bacterial, parasitic and fungal) with systemic manifestations, procalcitonin levels rise [290]. In contrast, during severe viral infections or inflammatory reactions of non-infectious origin, procalcitonin levels show only a moderate or no increase. Mid-regional proadrenomedulline is another sepsis marker. Mid-regional proadrenomedullin has been shown to play a decisive role in the induction of hyperdynamic circulation during the early stages of sepsis and progression to septic shock [291]. Procalcitonin monitoring may be useful in patients likely to develop sepsis and to differentiate from a severe inflammatory status not due to bacterial infection [290,292]. In addition, serum lactate is a marker of organ dysfunction and is associated with mortality in sepsis [293]. Serum lactate should therefore also be monitored in patients with severe infections. 3.9.5. Disease management 3.9.5.1. Prevention Septic shock is the most frequent cause of death for patients hospitalised for community-acquired and nosocomial infection (20-40%). Urosepsis treatment requires a combination of treatment including source control (obstruction of the urinary tract), adequate life-support care, and appropriate antimicrobial therapy [284,289]. In such a situation, it is recommended that urologists collaborate with intensive care and infectious disease specialists for the best management of the patient. 3.9.5.1.1. Preventive measures of proven or probable efficacy The most effective methods to prevent nosocomial urosepsis are the same as those used to prevent other nosocomial infections [294,295] they include: Isolation of patients with multi-resistant organisms following local and national recommendations.Prudent use of antimicrobial agents for prophylaxis and treatment of established infections, to avoid selection of resistant strains. Antibiotic agents should be chosen according to the predominant pathogens at a given site of infection in the hospital environment.Reduction in hospital stay. Long inpatient periods before surgery lead to a greater incidence of nosocomial infections.Early removal of indwelling urethral catheters, as soon as allowed by the patient’s condition. Nosocomial UTIs are promoted by bladder catheterisation as well as by ureteral stenting [296]. Antibiotic prophylaxis does not prevent stent colonisation, which appears in 100% of patients with a permanent ureteral stent and in 70% of those temporarily stented.Use of closed catheter drainage and minimisation of breaks in the integrity of the system, e.g. for urine sampling or bladder wash-out.Use of least-invasive methods to release urinary tract obstruction until the patient is stabilised.Attention to simple everyday techniques to assure asepsis, including the routine use of protective disposable gloves, frequent hand disinfection, and using infectious disease control measures to prevent cross-infections. 3.9.5.1.2. Appropriate peri-operative antimicrobial prophylaxis For appropriate peri-operative antimicrobial prophylaxis see section 3.15. The potential side effects of antibiotics must be considered before their administration in a prophylactic regimen. 3.9.5.2. Treatment Early goal-directed resuscitation was initially shown to improve survival for emergency department patients presenting with septic shock in a randomised, controlled, single-centre study [297]. However, follow-up studies in an improved emergency medicine background have not achieved positive effects with this strategy [298-300]. An individual patient data meta-analysis of the later three multicentre trials concluded that early goal-directed therapy did not result in better outcomes than usual care and was associated with higher hospitalisation costs [301]. 3.9.5.2.1. Antimicrobial therapy Initial empiric antimicrobial therapy should provide broad antimicrobial coverage against all likely causative pathogens and should be adapted on the basis of culture results, once available [282,289]. The dosage of the antimicrobial substances is of paramount importance in patients with sepsis syndrome and should generally be high, with appropriate adjustment for renal function [282]. Antimicrobials must be administered no later than one hour after clinical assumption of sepsis [282]. 3.9.5.2.2. Source control Obstruction in the urinary tract is the most frequent urological source of urosepsis. Drainage of obstruction and abscesses, and removal of foreign bodies, such as urinary catheters or stones is therefore the most important source control strategy. These are key components of the strategy. This condition is an absolute emergency. 3.9.5.2.3. Adjunctive measures The most important adjunctive measures in the management of sepsis are the following [282,289]: fluid therapy with crystalloids, or albumin, if crystalloids are not adequately increasing blood pressure: passive leg raising-induced changes in cardiac output and in arterial pulse pressure are predictors of fluid responsiveness in adults [302];as vasopressors norepinephrine should be used primarily, dobutamine in myocardial dysfunction;hydrocortisone should be given only if fluid and vasopressors do not achieve a mean arterial pressure of ≥ 65 mmHg;blood products should be given to target a haemoglobin level of 7-9 g/dL;mechanical ventilation should be applied with a tidal volume 6 mL/kg and plateau pressure ≤ 30 cm H2O and a high positive end-expiratory pressure;sedation should be given minimally, neuromuscular blocking agents should be avoided;glucose levels should be target at ≤ 180 mg/dL;deep vein thrombosis prevention should be given with low-molecular weight heparin subcutaneously;stress ulcer prophylaxis should be applied in patients at risk, using proton pump inhibitors;enteral nutrition should be started early (< 48 hours). In conclusion, sepsis in urology remains a severe situation with a considerable mortality rate. A recent campaign, ‘Surviving Sepsis Guidelines’, aims to reduce mortality by 25% in the next years [282,289,303]. Early recognition of the symptoms may decrease the mortality by timely treatment of urinary tract disorders, e.g. obstruction, or urolithiasis. Adequate life-support measures and appropriate antimicrobial treatment provide the best conditions for improving patient survival. The prevention of sepsis is dependent on good practice to avoid nosocomial infections and using antimicrobial prophylaxis and therapy in a prudent and well-accepted manner. 3.9.5.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of urosepsis Summary of evidenceLEInitial high dose empiric antimicrobial therapy, administered within the first hour, should provide broad antimicrobial coverage against all likely causative pathogens and should be adapted on the basis of culture results, once available.2bSource control interventions should be implemented as soon as possible to control or eliminate diagnosed and/or suspected infectious foci.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform the quickSOFA score to identify patients with potential sepsis.StrongTake a urine culture and two sets of blood cultures before starting antimicrobial treatment.StrongAdminister parenteral high dose broad spectrum antimicrobials within the first hour after clinical assumption of sepsis.StrongAdapt initial empiric antimicrobial therapy on the basis of culture results.StrongInitiate source control including removal of foreign bodies, decompression of obstruction and drainage of abscesses in the urinary tract.StrongProvide immediate adequate life-support measures.Strong Table 7: Suggested regimens for antimicrobial therapy for urosepsis. AntimicrobialsDaily doseDuration of therapyCefotaxime2 g t.i.d7-10 daysLonger courses are appropriate in patients who have a slow clinical responseCeftazidime1-2 g t.i.dCeftriaxone1-2 g q.dCefepime2 g b.i.dPiperacillin/tazobactam4.5 g t.i.dCeftolozane/tazobactam1.5 g t.i.dCeftazidime/avibactam2.5 g t.i.dGentamicin*5 mg/kg q.dAmikacin*15 mg/kg q.dErtapenem1 g q.dImipenem/cilastatin0.5 g t.i.dMeropenem1 g t.i.d * Not studied as monotherapy in urosepsisb.i.d = twice daily; t.i.d = three times daily; q.d = every day. 