7.2. Treatment of localised primary urethral carcinoma in females. 7.2.1. Urethrectomy and urethra-sparing surgery In women with localised urethral carcinoma, to provide the highest chance of local cure, primary radical urethrectomy should include removal of all the peri-urethral tissue from the bulbocavernosus muscle bilaterally and distally, with a cylinder of all adjacent soft tissue up to the pubic symphysis and bladder neck. Bladder neck closure and appendicovesicostomy for primary distal urethral lesions has been shown to provide satisfactory functional results [37]. Previous series have reported outcomes in women with mainly distal urethral tumours undergoing primary treatment with urethra-sparing surgery, with or without additional radiotherapy (RT) compared to primary urethrectomy with the aim of maintaining integrity and function of the lower urinary tract [72,73]. In longer-term series with a median follow-up of 153–175 months, local recurrence rates in women undergoing partial urethrectomy with intra-operative frozen section analysis were 22–60%, and distal sleeve resection of > 2 cm resulted in secondary urinary incontinence in 42% of patients who subsequently required additional reconstructive surgery [72,73]. Ablative surgical techniques, i.e., transurethral resection (TUR) or laser, used for small distal urethral tumours, have also resulted in considerable local failure rates of 16%, with a CSS rate of 50%. This emphasises the critical role of local tumour control in women with distal urethral carcinoma to prevent local and systemic progression [72]. 7.2.2. Radiotherapy In women, RT was investigated in several older series with a medium follow up of 91–105 months [74]. With a median cumulative dose of 65 Gy (range 40–106 Gy), the 5-year local control rate was 64% and 7-year CSS was 49% [74]. Most local failures (95%) occurred within the first two years after primary treatment [74]. The extent of urethral tumour involvement was found to be the only parameter independently associated with local tumour control but the type of RT (EBRT vs. interstitial brachytherapy) was not [74]. In one study, the addition of brachytherapy to EBRT reduced the risk of local recurrence by a factor of 4.2 [75]. Of note, pelvic toxicity in those achieving local control was considerable (49%), including urethral stenosis, fistula, necrosis, cystitis and/ or haemorrhage, with 30% of the reported complications graded as severe [74]. 7.2.3. Summary of evidence and guidelines for the treatment of localised primary urethral carcinoma in females Summary of evidenceLEIn females with distal urethral tumours, urethra-sparing surgery and local RT represent alternatives to primary urethrectomy but are associated with increased risk of tumour recurrence and local toxicity.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer urethra-sparing surgery, as an alternative to primary urethrectomy, to females with distal urethral tumours, if negative surgical margins can be achieved intra-operatively.WeakOffer local radiotherapy, as an alternative to urethral surgery, to females with localised urethral tumours but discuss local toxicity.Weak 