7.3. Multimodal treatment in locally-advanced urethral carcinoma in both males and females. 7.3.1. Introduction Multimodal therapy in primary urethral carcinoma consists of definitive surgery plus chemotherapy with additional RT [76]. Multimodal therapy was often underutilised as shown by Cahn and colleagues in locally- advanced disease (only 16%) notwithstanding promising results [76-79]. In a recent study monotherapy was associated with decreased local recurrence-free survival after adjusting for stage, histology, sex, and year of treatment (p = 0.017). Its use has decreased over time [80]. Treatment in academic centres was reported to result in higher utilisation of neoadjuvant- and multimodal treatment and improved OS in patients with locally- advanced urothelial- and SCC primary urethral carcinoma [65]. 7.3.2. Preoperative cisplatin-based chemotherapy Retrospective studies reported that modern cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy regimens can be effective in advanced primary urethral carcinoma providing prolonged survival even in LN-positive disease. Moreover, they emphasised the critical role of surgery after chemotherapy to achieve long-term survival in patients with locally-advanced urethral carcinoma. In a study using the National Cancer Database in men with primary urothelial carcinoma, NAC was reported to decrease the risk of all-cause mortality, while AC was not associated with an OS benefit, as compared to no chemotherapy in men, with primary urothelial carcinoma neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) was reported to exhibit improved OS compared with adjuvant chemotherapy [81]. In a series of 124 patients, 39 (31%) were treated with peri-operative platinum-based chemotherapy for advanced primary urethral carcinoma (twelve patients received NAC, six received neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and 21 adjuvant chemotherapy). Patients who received NAC or chemoradiotherapy for locally-advanced primary urethral carcinoma (> cT3 and/or cN+) appeared to demonstrate improved survival compared to those who underwent upfront surgery with or without adjuvant chemotherapy [82]. Another retrospective series including 44 patients with advanced primary urethral carcinoma, reported outcomes on 21 patients who had preoperatively received cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy according to the underlying histologic subtype. The overall response rate for the various regimens was 72% and the median OS 32 months [51]. 7.3.3. Chemoradiotherapy in locally-advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the urethra The clinical feasibility of local RT with concurrent chemotherapy as an alternative to surgery in locally-advanced SCC has been reported in several series. This approach offers a potential for genital preservation [83-87]. The largest, and recently updated, retrospective series reported outcomes in 25 patients with primary locally- advanced SCC of the urethra treated with two cycles of 5-fluorouracil and mitomycin C with concurrent EBRT. A complete clinical response was observed in ~80% of patients. The 5-year OS and disease-specific survival was 52% and 68%, respectively. In this updated series, salvage surgery, initiated only in non-responders or in case of local failure, was not reported to be associated with improved survival [83]. A large retrospective cohort study in patients with locally-advanced urethral carcinoma treated with adjuvant RT and surgery vs. surgery alone demonstrated that the addition of RT improved OS [88]. 7.3.4. Salvage treatment in recurrent primary urethral carcinoma after surgery for primary treatment A multicentre study reported that patients who were treated with surgery as primary therapy and underwent surgery or RT-based salvage treatment for recurrent solitary or concomitant urethral disease, demonstrated similar survival rates compared to patients who never developed recurrence after primary treatment [66]. 7.3.5. Treatment of regional lymph nodes Nodal control in urethral carcinoma can be achieved either by regional lymph node (LN) dissection [36], RT [74] or chemotherapy [51]. Currently, there is still no clear evidence supporting prophylactic bilateral inguinal and/ or pelvic LND in all patients with urethral carcinoma [53]. However, in patients with clinically enlarged inguinal/ pelvic LNs or invasive tumours, regional LND should be considered as initial treatment since cure might still be achievable with limited disease [36]. It was recently shown that in patients with invasive urethral SCC and cN1–2 disease, inguinal LND conferred an OS benefit [53]. 7.3.6. Summary of evidence and guidelines for multimodal treatment in advanced urethral carcinoma in both males and females Summary of evidenceLEIn locally-advanced urethral carcinoma, cisplatin-based chemotherapy with curative intent prior to surgery might improve survival compared to chemotherapy alone, or surgery followed by chemotherapy.3In locally-advanced SCC of the urethra, treatment with chemoradiotherapy might be an alternative to surgery.3In locally-advanced urothelial- and SCC of the urethra, treatment in academic centres improves OS.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingRefer patients with advanced urethral carcinoma to academic centres.StrongDiscuss treatment of patients with locally-advanced urethral carcinoma within a multidisciplinary team of urologists, radiation-oncologists, and oncologists.StrongIn locally-advanced urethral carcinoma, use cisplatin-based chemotherapeutic regimens with curative intent prior to surgery.WeakIn locally-advanced squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the urethra, offer the combination of curative radiotherapy (RT) with radiosensitising chemotherapy for definitive treatment and genital preservation.WeakOffer salvage surgery or RT to patients with urethral recurrence after primary treatment.WeakOffer inguinal lymph node (LN) dissection to patients with limited LN-positive urethral SCC.Weak 