7.2. Rationale for follow-up. From an oncological perspective, surveillance is important as early detection of recurrence may increase the likelihood of curative treatment. Some studies suggest local recurrence does not significantly reduce long-term survival if successfully treated [147,303]. However, a recent multi-centre study reported an increased risk of recurrence following glansectomy in men with more aggressive disease (T3 and/or high grade), which in turn resulted in poorer OS and CSS [145]. Disease that has spread to the inguinal LNs greatly reduces the rate of long-term CSS. Follow-up is also important for survivorship, allowing for the detection and management of the physical and psychological impact of treatments. The use of Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS) related to body image (Male Genital Self-Image Scale MGSIS-5) and lymphoedema (Groin and Lower Limb lymphoedema questionnaire G3L-20) have been proposed as tools to help patients and their healthcare team raise and discuss embarrassing topics during consultations [304]. Local or regional nodal recurrences usually occur within two to three years of primary treatment [147,305,306]. A recent study of 509 patients reported 52.3% of local recurrences occurred within two years and 79.5% within three years [306]. Fewer than 5% of regional or distant recurrences occur after two years, with the majority occurring within the first year after treatment [305,306]. After five years, all recurrences were either local or new primary lesions [147]. This supports an intensive follow-up regimen during the first two years, with a less intensive follow-up later for a total of at least five years. Follow-up after five years may be omitted in motivated patients who will undertake regular self-examination reliably [147]. 7.2.1. When and how to follow-up After local treatment with negative inguinal nodes, follow-up should include physical examination of the penis and groins for local and/or regional recurrence. Additional imaging has no proven benefit. Follow-up also depends on the primary treatment modality. Histology from the glans should be obtained to confirm disease-free status following laser ablation or topical chemotherapy. After potentially curative treatment for inguinal nodal metastases, CT or MRI imaging for the detection of systemic disease (imaging of thorax, abdomen and pelvis) should be performed at 3-monthly intervals for the first two years. Following this, the frequency is usually reduced to 6-monthly for a total of 5 years of follow-up. However, one study of 224 node-positive patients reported only two recurrences in years 3–5 of follow-up, and both of these were pN3 patients [305]. Although rare, late local recurrence may occur. Therefore, regular follow-up can be stopped after 5 years, provided the patient understands the need to report any local changes immediately [98]. In patients unlikely to self-examine, long-term follow-up may be necessary (Table 7.1). 7.2.2. Recurrence of the primary tumour Local recurrence is more likely with all types of local organ-sparing treatment. Until recently it was not believed to influence the CSS rate, although one study recently challenged this showing a reduction in OS and CSS following local recurrence after glansectomy [145]. Large series of glansectomies have reported local recurrence rates around 10% [145,307], although others have reported recurrence in up to 27% of patients treated with penis-preserving modalities, usually occurring within the first two years [146]. After partial penectomy, the risk of local recurrence is about 4–5% [146,147,303]. Local recurrence is easily detected by physical examination, by the patient himself or his physician. Patient education is an essential part of follow-up, and the patient should be urged to visit a specialist if any changes are seen. 7.2.3. Regional recurrence Most regional recurrences occur during the first two years after treatment, irrespective of whether surveillance or invasive nodal staging were used. Although unlikely, regional recurrence can occur later than two years after treatment. It is therefore advisable to continue follow up in these patients [98]. The highest rate of regional recurrence (9%) occurs in patients managed by surveillance, while the lowest is in patients who have undergone invasive nodal staging by modified ILND or DSNB and whose LNs were negative (2.3%). The use of US and FNAC in suspicious cases has improved the early detection rate of regional recurrence [106,107,308]. Patients who have had surgery for LN metastases without adjuvant treatment have an increased risk of regional recurrence of 19% [147]. Regional recurrence requires timely treatment by rILND with (neo)adjuvant chemotherapy/chemo-radiotherapy. Table 7.1: Follow-up regime for penile cancer Interval of surveillanceExaminations and investigationsMinimum duration of follow-upYears 1–2Years 3–5Recommendations for follow-up of the primary tumourPenile-preserving treatment3-monthly6-monthlyRegular physician or self-examination. Repeat biopsy after topical or laser treatment for PeIN (optional).5 yearsAmputation3-monthlyAnnuallyRegular physician or self-examination.5 yearsRecommendations for follow-up of the inguinal lymph nodesSurveillance3-monthly6-monthlyRegular physician or self-examination.US ± FNAC optional.5 yearspN03-monthlyAnnuallyRegular physician or self-examination.US ± FNAC optional.5 yearspN+3-monthly6-monthlyRegular physician or self-examination.US ± FNAC, CT chest/abdomen/pelvis or 18FDG-PET/CT optional.5 years CT = computed tomography; 18FDG = 18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose; FNAC = fine needle aspiration cytology;PET = positron emission tomography; US = ultrasound. 