7.3. Patient support services. Surveillance is not just about assessing for recurrent disease and men may require more frequent appointments than suggested above, with different members of the multi-disciplinary team to deliver patient support services and address QoL challenges. In fact, the latter starts at the first pre-operative consultation, where a needs assessment can identify areas that will be individually more challenging for that patient, be it physical, psychological, emotional, social or financial. Many men with penile cancer reflect that whilst the knowledge of potential functional and psychological impacts of treatment would not have stopped them proceeding with it, they wish they had a better understanding before embarking on the surgery. Pre-habilitation programmes can also help with this. Recently a qualitative study highlighted that men with penile cancer would appreciate more focus on the following themes: “early signs and seeking help”, “disclosure of a personal cancer” and “urological (dys)function” [309]. Unfortunately, not all men survive penile cancer and some present with, or recur with, advanced disease, some with extremely challenging symptoms to manage, including pain, odour and discharge. In addition to medical treatments outlined in other parts of these guidelines, early involvement of palliative care services for symptom control can make a huge difference to these patients. 7.3.1. Psychological support Access to psychological support, counselling and psychosexual therapy are critical components of a holistic and multi-disciplinary survivorship service. Men will often think “why me?” and need help to process their thoughts and try to adjust to their changing situation. Areas for discussion might include identity and self-esteem (lifestyle and role adjustments), being a perceived burden, illness beliefs and perceptions, levels of social support, relationship quality and intimacy, body and self-image and concerns around mortality. Despite these significant psychological challenges, the rate of suicide, based on the SEER database (1973–2013) is amongst the lowest of all urological malignancies; 13 out of 6,155 men [310]. 7.3.2. Quality of life There is very little data on QoL after treatment for penile cancer. In particular, there is heterogeneity of the psychometric tools used to assess QoL outcomes and further research is needed to develop disease-specific PROMS for penile cancer. Some validated questionnaires have been used but none of them were validated in men with penile cancer. Tools used include LYMQOL (lymphoedema) [311], IIEF (erectile dysfunction) [312], SF-36 [313], European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer [EORTC] QLQ-C30 [314], Quality of Life Questionnaire-Penile Cancer-Rostock (HRO-PE29) [315], Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale [316], EQ-5D (Euro QoL tool), Bigelow’s questionnaire [317], Male Genital Self-Image Scale MGSIS-5 and Groin and Lower Limb lymphoedema questionnaire G3L-20 [318]. Not surprisingly, published studies and discussions with patient groups demonstrate that penile cancer and its treatments have a significant impact on overall QoL, both physical and psychological. However, there is discrepancy in the literature as to whether partial penectomy impacts QoL more than penile-preserving surgical techniques, as discussed below. Erectile dysfunction, reduced frequency of sexual intercourse and reduced satisfaction with intercourse are reported in some studies [319,320]. Urinary spraying [321] is another potential significant consequence of penile cancer surgery. Significant anxiety (31%) and depression (6%) has also been reported [322]. A German study reported on 76 patients following primary penile surgery. They reported a global QoL score well below the national average for age-standardised German patients, with voiding, sexuality, body image, lymphoedema all reported as areas of concern [315]. A Dutch study, where 90 patients returned their questionnaires (a return rate of 62%) orgasm, appearance concerns, life interference and urinary function were all significantly poorer following partial penectomy compared with a penile-preserving approach. In the same study, LND had a significant impact on life interference. Interestingly, when compared to an age and gender matched normative sample from the general population the patients reported better outcomes for the SF-36 physical domain and bodily pain sub scale [321]. A recent SR [3] reported on post-treatment QoL from 10 studies involving 346 men [157,176,315,321,323-328]. Two studies evaluated QoL as the primary endpoint and compared the outcomes among various treatment modalities [323,327]. One of these studies used EORTC QLQ C-30 and reported on the QoL of men after penile cancer management with different treatment modalities. They observed that the treatment itself was not related to overall wellbeing or to social contact and activity. However, half of the individuals had psychological symptoms at follow-up [327]. In contrast, a retrospective study of men who underwent penile-preserving surgery reported a significant impact of surgery in every domain of EORTC QLQ-C30 questionnaire [315]. Another study used Bigelow’s questionnaire and compared the post-operative QoL score to that at two weeks before surgery [328]. It reported that the scores relating to unpleasant feeling, sexual pleasure and familial/partner relations improved significantly (p < 0.01) whereas the domains relating to friend relationships and professional quality were unchanged. Two non-randomised comparative studies used EORTC QLQ-C30 to assess QoL after penile preserving surgery or amputative surgery [323,324]. The first trial on 51 men reported a statistically significant negative correlation between aggressiveness of surgery and global health status and physical functioning [323]. Whereas the other reported no significant differences between penile-preserving surgery or partial penectomy in functional scale, symptom scale and in the global health status [324]. A comparison between glans resurfacing, glansectomy and partial penectomy using the EQ-5D tool showed no difference between groups with comparable health status scores of 82.5, 85.0 and 87.5 respectively [157]. Another non-randomised comparative study also compared penile-preserving surgery to partial penectomy and reported no difference in QoL using the SF-36 scores [321]. Those who underwent amputative surgery had significantly more appearance concerns (p = 0.008) and they reported more life interference (p = 0.032) depending on the degree of disfigurement caused by the procedure. 7.3.3. Urinary function Urinary function is an important topic to discuss with men before penile cancer treatment. Some will already be experiencing difficulty voiding due to their tumour causing urethral obstruction and many report they sit down to pass urine due to the spraying caused by the tumour. As a result, some report improved function following surgery, often in terms of flow but spraying and needing to sit down to void or use a funnel/bottle can be debilitating for many men. Urinary function has been objectively assessed in only a few studies. Two case series reported improvement in post-operative urinary function and high satisfaction after penile surgery [326,329]. Two non-randomised comparative studies reported no difference in urination between penile-preserving surgery or amputation. One demonstrated similar maximum flow rates following surgery (19.5 mL/s vs. 20.8 mL/s) [324] the other reported that urinary function was comparable across the study groups (glans resurfacing, glansectomy and partial penectomy) using the ICIQ-MLUTS score [157]. However, a different study found that urine spraying is more common after partial penectomy as compared to penile-preserving surgery (83% vs. 43%) [321]. Two case series reported no significant changes in urinary function following brachytherapy [166,176]. A single trial on Moh’s micrographic surgery, reported no post-treatment change (66% response rate) [330]. 7.3.4. Sexual function Sexual and erectile function after penile cancer varies between studies and between treatments. Generally, penile-preserving surgery preserves erectile function, although glans sensation and orgasm can be affected. Overall, partial penectomy is associated with poorer sexual outcomes. A recent SR [3] reported on the sexual and erectile function from 27 studies that involve 991 men. The 5- or 15-question International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF) scores were used by most studies. Other tools used were the Erectile Dysfunction Inventory of treatment satisfaction score (EDITS), the index of male genitalia image (IM-GI), the Life Satisfaction of sexual life, the SELF-Esteem and Relationship (SEAR) or a combination of tools to assess overall sexual function [176,324,325,327,331]. It is important to acknowledge that only a few studies assessed baseline function and are therefore able to report the difference between pre- and post-treatment. Most studies reported only the post-treatment scores or the mean difference for retrospectively completed pre-treatment scores. Three non-randomised comparative studies and one case series assessed the impact of penile-preserving surgery vs. amputation on sexual function of 202 men [321,324,327,332]. Two studies that used the 15-question IIEF questionnaire reported significant post-treatment changes in the orgasmic function domain in favour of penile-preserving surgery (p = 0.033 and p = 0.033) while the other domains remain comparable between the treatment arms [321,324]. However, in other studies using the 5-question IIEF score, no difference was identified between treatments [157,332]. An older study that compared the impact of penile-preserving surgery, amputative surgery and radiotherapy on sexual function reported that those treated with amputation had worst sexual outcome [327]. Three trials retrospectively compared penile-preserving surgery techniques using IIEF questionnaire [326,333,334]. Wide local excision was superior to glansectomy in all IIEF domains [333]. The impact of primary closure versus preputial flap reconstruction after glans-preserving surgery was similar as seen by IIEF results at 6 months or by rigid-scan parameters [334]. Partial glansectomy was not superior to total glansectomy [326]. Cohort studies have reported similar findings on sexual function. Five studies on patients who underwent penile-preserving surgery and reconstruction reported that 85–100% of men were able to achieve erection and maintain their sexual function [158,335-338]. However, all patients reported reduced glans sensitivity. Following glans resurfacing for penile cancer (n = 21) or lichen sclerosis (n = 16) one study reported no significant change in urinary or sexual function (using IPPS and IIEF questionnaires) with glans sensitivity preserved in 89.2% of men [339]. Four studies on 167 men who have had partial penectomy reported significant changes in 15-question IIEF score with negative impact in every domain [319,329,331,340]. A single trial reported that 61.7% of men after partial penectomy report erectile dysfunction [340]. However, a study from Brazil, assessing 14 patients following partial penectomy, found that for 64% overall sexual function was normal or slightly decreased and frequency of sexual intercourse was unchanged or slightly decreased [320]. The sexual function after brachytherapy has been assessed in five cohort studies [162,166,176,341,342]. Among men who were sexually active before treatment, 58.8–70.0% remain sexually active after treatment [162,176]. Potency was maintained in 81.5–100% of men [162,166,176,341,342]. Altered glans sensitivity is reported in 52.6% [162]. Three studies assessed sexual function after laser treatment [155,325,343] and 46–56.5% of men report an impact of treatment on their sexual life [325,343]. A single trial on 46 men found that 72% reported no change in erectile function, 22% reported decreased erectile function and 6% reported improvement [155]. One trial on patients who underwent Moh’s micrographic surgery reported no change in sexual function after treatment (57.5% response rate) [330]. 7.3.5. Lymphoedema Lymphoedema significantly impacted functional domains in one study of patients 25 months following penile cancer nodal surgical treatment with inguinal and PLND having a much higher impact than ILND alone. Patients who had inguinal and PLND also had a much poorer mood score (38% vs. 0%) [344]. Due to the significant morbidity associated with ILND, many patients are not offered the operation or choose not to have it. An analysis of the US SEER database reported that only 233 out of 943 nonmetastatic penile cancer patients (24.7%) had ILND between 1998 and 2015 [223]. This did not change over time. A similar proportion of men, 606 out of 2224 (27.2%) underwent the surgery between 2004 and 2014 as recorded by the National Cancer Database [345]. Men should be assessed for genital and lower limb lymphoedema at each outpatient clinic appointment, advised about good skin care, compression, exercise, massage, and elevation when resting as the mainstay of treatment. Following nodal surgery, ideally, they would be referred to specialist lymphoedema services for assessment and management before any significant lymphoedema occurs. Specialist lymphoedema services offer a range of made-to-measure compression garments or multi-layer lymphoedema bandaging for lower limb and genital lymphoedema. The latter not only compress the scrotal lymphoedema but also aim to lift it to aid drainage. For lower limb compression adjustable Velcro garments also exist. Good skin care is critical to prevent infection that can damage remaining lymphatic channels. Prophylactic antibiotics should be used following any episode of cellulitis, with penicillin V, erythromycin or clindamycin recommended, except in genital lymphoedema where prophylactic trimethoprim can be used [346]. Manual lymphatic drainage in the form of specialised massage techniques also helps to alleviate lymphoedema and encourages drainage. Following penile cancer treatments this is commonly used for stubborn mons and lower abdominal swelling and thickening of the scrotum and penile shaft. Whilst regular exercise may temporarily increase lymphoedema due to the effect of gravity, it has an overall beneficial effect on lymphoedema by reducing abdominal fat (fat drains via lymphatic channels too) and using natural muscle pumps and changes in thoracic pressure to help lymphatic drainage. Strength training and stretching exercises to promote flexibility are also important. Debulking surgery with scrotal reduction and penile shaft skin grafting can significantly improve issues related to significant genital lymphoedema. There is limited evidence for the benefit of other surgical interventions such as limb liposuction followed by compression and lymphatico-venous anastomosis in penile cancer although some evidence does exist for extremity lymphoedema due to various causes [347]. 