3.3. Diagnostic evaluation. 3.3.1. Diagnostic imaging The most appropriate imaging modality will be determined by the clinical situation, which will differ depending on if a ureteral or a renal stone is suspected. Standard evaluation includes a detailed medical history and physical examination. Patients with ureteral stones usually present with loin pain, vomiting, and sometimes fever, but may also be asymptomatic [37]. Immediate evaluation is indicated in patients with solitary kidney, fever or when there is doubt regarding a diagnosis of renal colic. Ultrasound (US) should be used as the primary diagnostic imaging tool, although pain relief, or any other emergency measures, should not be delayed by imaging assessments. Ultrasound is safe (no risk of radiation), reproducible and inexpensive. It can identify stones located in the calyces, pelvis, and pyeloureteric and vesico-ureteral junctions (US with filled bladder), as well as in patients with upper urinary tract (UUT) dilatation. Ultrasound has a sensitivity of 45% and specificity of 94% for ureteral stones and a sensitivity of 45% and specificity of 88% for renal stones [38,39]. The sensitivity and specificity of KUB is 44-77% [40]. Kidney-ureter-bladder radiography [41] is helpful in differentiating between radiolucent and radiopaque stones and could be used for comparison during follow-up. 3.3.1.1. Evaluation of patients with acute flank pain/suspected ureteral stones Non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography has become the standard for diagnosing acute flank pain and has replaced intravenous urography (IVU). Non-contrast-enhanced CT can determine stone location, burden, and density. When stones are absent, the cause of abdominal pain should be identified. In evaluating patients with suspected acute urolithiasis, NCCT is significantly more accurate than IVU or US [42,43]. Non-contrast-enhanced CT can detect uric acid and xanthine stones, which are radiolucent on plain films, but not indinavir stones [44]. Non-contrast-enhanced CT can determine stone density, the inner structure of the stone, skin-to-stone distance, and surrounding anatomy; all of which affect the selection of treatment modality [45]. The advantage of non-contrast imaging must be balanced against the loss of information on renal function and urinary collecting system anatomy, as well as higher radiation dose [46-49]. Radiation risk can be reduced by low-dose CT, which may, however, be difficult to introduce in standard clinical practice [50-53]. In patients with a body mass index (BMI) < 30, low-dose CT has been shown to have a sensitivity of 86% for detecting ureteral stones < 3 mm and 100% for calculi > 3 mm [54]. A meta-analysis (MA) of prospective studies [55] has shown that low-dose CT diagnosed urolithiasis with a pooled sensitivity of 93.1% (95% CI: 91.5-94.4), and a specificity of 96.6% (95% CI: 95.1-97.7%). Dual-energy CT can differentiate uric acid containing stones from calcium-containing stones [36]. Summary of evidenceLENon-contrast-enhanced CT is used to confirm stone diagnosis in patients with acute flank pain, as it is superior to IVU.1aComputed tomography imaging enables 3D reconstruction of the collecting system, as well as measurement of stone density and skin-to-stone distance.2aConsider a contrast study if stone removal is planned and the anatomy of the renal collecting system needs to be assessed.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingImmediate imaging is indicated with fever or solitary kidney, and when diagnosis is doubtful.StrongUse non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography to confirm stone diagnosis in patients with acute flank pain following initial ultrasound assessment.Strong 3.3.2. Diagnostics - metabolism-related Besides imaging, each emergency patient with urolithiasis needs a succinct biochemical work-up of urine and blood test. At this point, no distinction is made between high- and low-risk patients for stone formation. 3.3.2.1. Basic laboratory analysis - non-emergency urolithiasis patients Biochemical work-up is similar for all stone patients (see 3.3.2.3). However, if no intervention is planned, examination of sodium, potassium, C-reactive protein (CRP), and blood coagulation time can be omitted. Only patients at high risk for stone recurrence should undergo a more specific analytical programme [17]. Stone-specific metabolic evaluation is described in Chapter 4. The easiest method for diagnosing stones is by analysis of a passed stone using a validated method as listed in section 3.3.2.3. Once the mineral composition is known, a potential metabolic disorder can be identified. 3.3.2.2. Analysis of stone composition Stone analysis should be performed on all first-time stone formers. In clinical practice, repeat stone analysis is needed in the case of: recurrence under pharmacological prevention;early recurrence after interventional therapy with complete stone clearance;late recurrence after a prolonged stone-free period [56,57]. Patients should be instructed to filter their urine to retrieve a concrement for analysis. Stone passage and restoration of baseline renal function should be confirmed. The preferred analytical procedures are infrared spectroscopy (IRS) or X-ray diffraction (XRD) [58,59]. Equivalent results can be obtained by polarisation microscopy. Chemical analysis (wet chemistry) is generally deemed to be obsolete [58,60]. 3.3.2.3. Recommendations for laboratory examinations and stone analysis [17,23,61-63] RecommendationsStrength ratingUrineDipstick test of spot urine sample:• red cells;• white cells;• nitrites;• approximate urine pH;• urine microscopy and/or culture.WeakBloodSerum blood sample:• creatinine;• uric acid;• (ionised) calcium;• sodium;• potassium;• blood cell count;• C-reactive protein.StrongPerform a coagulation test (partial thromboplastin time and international normalised ratio) if intervention is likely or planned.StrongPerform stone analysis in first-time formers using a valid procedure (X-ray diffraction or infrared spectroscopy).StrongRepeat stone analysis in patients presenting with:• recurrent stones despite drug therapy;• early recurrence after complete stone clearance;• late recurrence after a long stone-free period because stone composition may change.Strong 3.3.3. Diagnosis in special groups and conditions 3.3.3.1. Diagnostic imaging during pregnancy In pregnant women, radiation exposure may cause non-stochastic (teratogenesis) or stochastic (carcinogenesis, mutagenesis) effects. Teratogenic effects are cumulative with increasing doses and require a threshold dose(< 50 mGy are considered as safe) and depend on the gestation age (minimum risk prior to the 8th week and after the 23rd week). Carcinogenesis (dose even < 10 mGy present a risk) and mutagenesis (500-1000 mGy doses are required, far in excess of the doses in common radiographic studies) get worse with increasing dose but they do not require a dose threshold and are not dependent on the gestational age [64]. There is no imaging modality that should be routinely repeated in pregnant women. Scientific societies and organizations agree on the safety of the diagnostic evaluation when the US [65], X-ray imaging [66,67], and MRI [68] are used as and when indicated [69-76]. A radiographic procedure should not be withheld from a pregnant woman if the procedure is clearly indicated and doing so will affect her medical care. It is generally recommended that an investigation resulting in an absorbed dose to the foetus of greater than 0.5 mGy requires justification. Ultrasound (when necessary, using changes in the renal resistive index and transvaginal/transabdominal US with a full bladder) has become the primary radiological diagnostic tool when evaluating pregnant patients suspected of renal colic. However, normal physiological changes in pregnancy can mimic ureteral obstruction [72-74]. Magnetic resonance imaging can be used, as a second-line option [70], to define the level of urinary tract obstruction, and to visualise stones as a filling defect [77]. The use of gadolinium is not routinely recommended in pregnancy to avoid toxic effects on the embryo [72]. For the detection of urolithiasis during pregnancy, low-dose CT is associated with a higher positive predictive value (95.8%), compared to MRI (80%) and US (77%). As per White et al., low-dose CT offers improved diagnostic accuracy that can avoid negative interventions such as ureteroscopy [78]. Although low-dose CT protocols reduce radiation exposure, judicious use is currently recommended in pregnant women as a last-line option [72]. Summary of evidenceLEOnly low-level data exist for imaging in pregnant women supporting US and MRI.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingUse ultrasound as the preferred method of imaging in pregnant women.StrongUse magnetic resonance imaging as a second-line imaging modality in pregnant women.StrongUse low-dose computed tomography as a last-line option in pregnant women.Strong 3.3.3.2. Diagnostic imaging in children Children with urinary stones have a high risk of recurrence; therefore, standard diagnostic procedures for high-risk patients apply, including a valid stone analysis (Section 3.1.3 and Chapter 4). The most common nonmetabolic disorders facilitating stone formation are vesicoureteral reflux (VUR), UPJ obstruction, neurogenic bladder, and other voiding difficulties [79]. When selecting diagnostic procedures to identify urolithiasis in children, it should be remembered that these patients might be uncooperative, require anaesthesia, and may be sensitive to ionising radiation. Again, the principle of ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable) should be observed [80-84]. UltrasoundUltrasound is the primary imaging technique [85] in children. Its advantages are the absence of radiation and no need for anaesthesia. Imaging should include both the fluid-filled bladder with adjoining portion of the ureters, as well as the upper ureter [80]. Colour Doppler US shows differences in the ureteral jet [86] and resistive index of the arciform arteries of both kidneys, which are indicative of the grade of obstruction [87]. Nevertheless, the US may fail to identify ureteral stones and provides limited information on renal function [88]. Plain films (KUB radiography)Kidney-ureter-bladder radiography can help to identify stones and their radiopacity and facilitate follow-up. Intravenous urographyThe radiation dose for IVU is comparable to that for voiding cystourethrography (0.33 mSV) [89]. However, the need for contrast medium injection is a major drawback. Non-contrast-enhanced computed tomographyLow-dose CT protocols have been shown to significantly reduce radiation exposure [90-92]. Sedation or anaesthesia is rarely needed with modern high-speed CT equipment. Magnetic resonance urographyMagnetic resonance urography (MRU) cannot be used to detect urinary stones. However, it might provide detailed anatomical information about the urinary collecting system, the location of an obstruction or stenosis in the ureter, and renal parenchymal morphology [93]. 3.3.3.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for diagnostic imaging in children Summary of evidenceLEUltrasound is the first-line imaging modality in children when a stone is suspected; it should include the kidney, fluid-filled bladder, and the ureter next to the kidney and the (filled) bladder.2bA kidney-ureter-bladder radiography (or low-dose NCCT) is an alternative investigation if US will not provide the required information.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingComplete a metabolic evaluation based on stone analysis in all children.StrongCollect stone material for analysis to classify the stone type.StrongPerform ultrasound as first-line imaging modality in children when a stone is suspected; it should include the kidney, fluid-filled bladder, and the ureter.StrongPerform a kidney-ureter-bladder radiography (or low-dose non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography) if ultrasound will not provide the required information.Strong 