3.5. Radiation exposure and protection during endourology. The diagnosis and treatment of nephrolithiasis are associated with high levels of ionising radiation exposure to patients [523,524]. Currently, there are no studies estimating the lifetime radiation exposure of stone formers or the subsequent risk of malignancy development. The radiation exposure of endourologists has been extensively studied. Still, there are no studies assessing the risk of radiation-induced malignancies in urologists or operating theatre staff members [525-527]. Current evidence from atomic bomb patients [528,529], retrospective epidemiological data on medical exposure [530,531], and modelling studies [532,533] suggest an age and dose-dependent risk of secondary malignancy from ionising radiation. The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) recommends a maximum annual occupational exposure of 50mSv [534]. However, the risk of radiation-induced malignancy follows a stochastic model having no known safe threshold of exposure. Taking this into consideration as well as the length of a urologist’s career the upper limit of 50mSv is still highly concerning. Table 3.12 shows the EAU Urolithiasis guidelines panel recommended protection methods to reduce radiation exposure to patients, surgical, anaesthesiologic, and nursing staff. Table 3.12: Radiation protection measures Radiation protection measuresLimit studies or intervention involving radiation exposure to those that are strictly medically necessary.Implement a patient electronic record of medical imaging.Make use of imaging studies with lower radiation doses (US, KUB, digital tomosynthesis, low-dose and ultra-low dose CT scan).Create and follow a precise radiation exposure protection protocol in your department.Act in accordance with the as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA) principle.Measure and report fluoroscopy time to the operative surgeon (use dosimeters and perform monthly calculations).Technical measures to reduce radiation exposure include:Reducing fluoroscopy time;Limiting time adjacent to patient;Using low-dose radiation; Irradiating only to observe motion;Intra-operative use of pulsed fluoroscopy;Reduced fluoroscopy pulse rate;Collimated fields;Avoid digital image acquisition and rely on last image hold and instant replay technology.Use radiation protection instruments (chest, pelvic and thyroid shields, lead or lead-free gloves, protective glasses, lead protection under the operating table between the x-ray source and the surgeon).The radiation protection instruments must be cared for appropriately as any damage decreases effectiveness and increases exposure risk. They should be monitored and measured regularly to ensure integrity.Proper surgeon and operating room setup should be observed (follow the inverse square law, use the x-ray source underneath the patient’s body, decrease the x-ray source to patient distance, reduce magnification, avoid field overlap by not turning the C-arm in extreme angles, operate in the standing rather than the seated position). The availability of fluoroscopy is mandatory for endourological procedures. There is an increasing interest in fluoroless and fluoroscopy-free operations in urology. Several RCTs have been published showing a good outcome in means of stone-free and complication rates [166,270,535-537]. These trials have been limited to non-complex cases and they were not sufficiently powered to show the non-inferiority of fluoroscopy in PCNL [270,525] or the superiority of ultrasound in URS [213,214]. 