11.6.2. Non-obstructive azoospermia. Non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) is defined as the absence of sperm at the semen analysis after centrifugation, with usually a normal ejaculate volume. This finding should be confirmed at least at two consecutives semen analyses [1558]. The severe deficit in spermatogenesis observed in NOA patients is often a consequence of primary testicular dysfunction or may be related to a dysfunction of the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis. 11.6.2.1. Investigation of non-obstructive azoospermia Clinical history-taking and clinical examination should follow the investigation and diagnostic evaluation of infertile men (See Section 11.3). Non-obstructive azoospermia can be the first sign of pituitary or germ cell tumours of the testis [1874-1876]. Patients with NOA have been shown to be at increased risk of long-term chronic non-communicable diseases (e.g., cardio-metabolic diseases, cancer) and mortality [1877-1882]. Therefore, investigation of infertile men provides an opportunity for long-term risk stratification for other comorbid conditions [1883]. A complete hormonal investigation and scrotal US are important in the diagnostic work-up of NOA men [1884,1885]. Concomitant hypogonadism, has been found in about 30% of patients with NOA [288,1884,1885]. Biochemical evaluation should be performed to differentiate the types of hypogonadism (i.e., hypogonadotropic hypogonadism vs. hypergonadotropic vs. compensated hypogonadism) as this will determine different therapeutic strategies to treat the hypogonadal male [1886]. Testicular volume is usually low in NOA patients and scrotal US may show signs of testicular dysgenesis (e.g., non-homogeneous testicular architecture and/or microcalcifications) and testicular tumours. Testicular volume may be a predictor of spermatogenic function [1549] and is usually, but not invariably, low in patients with NOA. Some authors have advocated that testicular perfusion detected at US Doppler assessment can predict surgical sperm retrieval at TESE and guide testicular biopsies [1887]; however, to date, data are inconsistent to support a routine role of testicular Doppler evaluation before TESE in order to predict sperm retrieval outcome. As discussed (see Section 11.3), patients should undergo karyotype analysis [1805,1806], along with a screening of Y-chromosome micro-deletions [1630,1888]. In patients with clinical suspicion of CBAVD assessment of mutations in the gene coding for CFTR is also to be recommended [1617,1618]. Genetic counselling for eventual transmissible and health-relevant genetic conditions should be provided to couples. 11.6.2.2. Surgery for non-obstructive azoospermia Surgical treatment for NOA is mostly aimed at retrieval of vital sperm directly from the testes (either uni- or bilaterally). This treatment is normally part of ART protocols, including IVF cycles via ICSI. Testicular biopsy before TESE is not recommended. 11.6.2.3. Indications and techniques of sperm retrieval Spermatogenesis within the testes may be focal, which means that spermatozoa can usually be found in small and isolated foci. With a wide variability among cohorts and techniques, positive SRRs have been reported in up to 50% of patients with NOA [1889,1890]. Numerous predictive factors for positive SSR have been investigated (see below), although no definitive factors have been demonstrated to predict SSR [1890]. Histology: The presence of hypospermatogenesis at testicular biopsy showed good accuracy in predicting positive sperm retrieval after TESE compared with maturation arrest pattern or SCOS [1891-1893].Hormonal levels: FSH, LH, inhibin B and AMH have been variably correlated with sperm retrieval outcomes, but data from retrospective series are controversial [1582,1843,1894-1898].Testicular volume has been inconsistently found to be a predictor of positive SSR [1843,1891,1897]. In case of complete AZFa and AZFb microdeletions, the likelihood of sperm retrieval is almost zero and therefore TESE procedures are contraindicated [1635]. Conversely, patients with Klinefelter syndrome [1602] and a history of undescended testes have been shown to have higher chance of finding sperm at surgery [1602,1897,1899]. Fine needle aspiration mapping Fine needle aspiration (FNA) mapping technique has been proposed as a prognostic procedure aimed to select patients with NOA for TESE and ICSI [1900]. The retrieved tissue is sent for cytological and histological evaluation to provide information on the presence of mature sperm and on testicular histological pattern. FNA mapping may provide information on the sites with the higher probability of retrieving sperm, thus serving as a guide for further sperm retrieval surgery in the context of ART procedures (e.g., ICSI). A positive FNA requires a secondary therapeutic surgical approach, which may increase the risk of testicular damage, and without appropriate cost-benefit analysis, is not justifiable. No studies have evaluated the salvage rate of mTESE in men who have undergone FNA mapping. Therefore, FNA mapping is not recommended as a primary therapeutic intervention in men with NOA until further RCTs are undertaken. Testicular sperm aspiration Testicular sperm aspiration (TESA) is a minimally invasive, office-based, procedure in which testicular tissue is retrieved with a biopsy needle under local anaesthesia. Reported SRRs with TESA range from 11 to 60% according to patient profile and surgical techniques [1901-1904]. Complications after TESA are uncommon and mainly include minor bleeding with scrotal haematoma and post-operative pain [1904]. To date no RCTs have compared SRRs from TESA, cTESE and mTESE. A meta-analysis including data from case-control studies, reported that TESE was two times (95% CI: 1.8-2.2) more likely to result in successful SSR as compared with TESA [1890]. Given the low success rates compared with TESE, TESA is no longer recommended in men with NOA. Conventional and microTESE Conventional TESE requires a scrotal incision and open biopsy of the testes [1905]. Reported SRRs in single-arm studies are about 50% [1889]. Observational studies have demonstrated that multiple biopsies yield a higher chance of sperm retrieval [1889,1906]. Conventional TESE has been associated with a higher rate of complications compared with other techniques [1889]. A total of 51.7% of patients have been found with intratesticular haematoma at scrotal US 3 months after surgery, with testicular fibrosis observed in up to 30% of patients at six-months’ assessment [1907]. Micro TESE is performed with an operative optical microscope to inspect seminiferous tubules at a magnification of 20-25x and it allows to find and extract those tubules which were larger, dilated and opaque as these were more likely to harbour sperm [1905]. The rationale of this technique is to increase the probability of retrieving sperm with a lower amount of tissue sampled and a subsequent lower risk of complications. Lower rates of complications have been observed with mTESE compared to cTESE, both in terms of haematoma and fibrosis [1908]. Both procedures have shown a recovery of baseline testosterone levels after long-term follow-up [1909,1910]. Therefore, it would be reasonable to provide long-term endocrinological follow-up after TESE (any type) to detect hypogonadism. A meta-analysis that pooled data analysis of case-control studies comparing cTESE with mTESE showed a lower unadjusted SRR of 35% (95% CI: 30-40) for cTESE and 52% for mTESE [1890]. A meta-analysis comparing cTESE and mTESE in patients with NOA showed a mean SRR of 47% (95% CI: 45;49%). No differences were observed when mTESE was compared with cTESE (46 [range 43-49] % for cTESE vs. 46 [range 42-49] % for mTESE, respectively) [1899]. Meta-regression analysis demonstrated that the SRR per cycle was independent of age and hormonal parameters at enrolment. However, the SRR increased as a function of testicular volume. Retrieved sperms resulted in a live-birth rate of up to 28% per ICSI cycle [1912]. The difference in surgical sperm retrieval outcomes between the two meta-analyses may be explained by the data studied [1890] only one analysed case control studies whilst Corona et al., [1912] also included the single randomised controlled trial), but it is important to note that all the studies comparing cTESE and mTESE have shown that the latter is superior in retrieving sperm. In this context, studies showed a higher chance of sperm retrieval with mTESE only for patients with a histological diagnosis of SCOS [1908]. In such cases, results ranged from 22.5 to 41% and from 6.3 to 29% for mTESE vs. cTESE, respectively [1908]. Conversely, no difference between the two techniques has been found when comparing patients with a histology suggestive of maturation arrest [1908]. A single study showed a small advantage of mTESE when hypospermatogenesis was found [1910]. In a study assessing the role of salvage mTESE after a previously failed cTESE or TESA, sperm were successfully retrieved in 46.5% of cases [1857]. In studies reporting SSR by micro-TESE for men who had failed percutaneous testicular sperm aspiration or non-microsurgical testicular sperm extraction, the SRR was 39.1% (range 18.4-57.1%) [1911,1912]. Similarly, a variable SRR has been reported for salvage mTESE after a previously failed mTESE (ranging from 18.4% to 42.8%) [1913,1914]. A recent meta-analysis investigated the risk of hypogonadism after TESE due to testicular atrophy [1915]; patients with NOA experienced a mean 2.7 nmol/L decrease in total testosterone 6 months after cTESE, which recovered to baseline within 18-26 months. Lower rates of complications have been observed with mTESE compared to cTESE, both in terms of haematoma and fibrosis [1908]. Both procedures have shown a recovery of baseline testosterone levels after long-term follow-up [1909,1910]. The main limitation to contemporary literature is the paucity of randomised controlled studies comparing cTESE and mTESE. Although no difference in SSR was observed between cTESE/mTESE techniques in patients with NOA in the latest and most comprehensive meta-analysis [1899], it is important to note that in all the individual trials comparing cTESE and mTESE the latter was superior in retrieving sperm. Furthermore, the current data suggests that mTESE has less complications than cTESE and therefore the consensus opinion of the guidelines panel is that mTESE is the optimum approach for surgical sperm retrieval procedures. However, this is based on low-quality evidence and larger RCTs comparing SSR, risks and costs between the two techniques are urgently needed. Hormonal therapy prior to surgical sperm retrieval approaches Stimulating spermatogenesis by optimising intratesticular testosterone (ITT) has been proposed to increase the chance of SSR in men with NOA. Similarly, increasing FSH serum levels could stimulate spermatogenesis. To this aim, several treatment options are available, thus including hCG and/or FSH [1838,1916,1917] or SERMs [1918], but a standardized protocol is lacking. No RCT has shown a benefit of hormonal treatment to enhance the chances of sperm retrieval among patients with idiopathic NOA [1919]. A meta-analysis has suggested that hormone stimulation prior to TESE might improve SRR in eugonadal but not in hypergonadotropic hypogonadal patients [1920]; however, the included studies had moderate or severe risk of bias and randomised studies are needed to confirm these findings. Hormonal therapy has also been proposed to increase the chance of sperm retrieval at salvage surgery after previously failed cTESE or mTESE. . Only small retrospective studies with conflicting results have been conducted [1838,1920-1922]. The histological finding of hypo-spermatogenesis emerged as a predictor of sperm retrieval at salvage surgery after hormonal treatment [1922]. Patients should be counselled that the evidence for the role of hormone stimulation prior to sperm retrieval surgery in men with idiopathic NOA is limited [1923]. Currently, it is not recommended in routine practice. 11.6.2.4. Recommendations for Non-Obstructive Azoospermia Summary of evidenceLEPatients with NOA are at increased risk of long term cardio-metabolic diseases, cancer and mortality.3Hypogonadism is present in about one third of men with non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA), before surgical for sperm retrieval.3Surgery for sperm retrieval is mandatory in NOA men before ART.1bFine needle aspiration (FNA) and testicular sperm aspiration (TESA) have lower sperm retrieval rates compared to TESE in patients with NOA.1bFNA requires a secondary therapeutic surgical approach, which may increase the risk of testicular damage, and without appropriate cost-benefit analysis it is not justifiable.2aNo definitive predictors of positive sperm retrieval before TESE have been identified.1bMicrodissection TESE has been associated with higher rates of sperm retrieval and lower complications than conventional TESE.2aNo conclusive data are available regarding the benefit of use of medical therapy before TESE (e.g., recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone [rFSH]; highly purified FSH; human chorionic gonadotrophin; aromatase inhibitors or selective oestrogen receptor modulators [SERMs]) in patients with NOA.2a RecommendationsStrength ratingConfirm a diagnosis of non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) in two consecutive semen analyses, when no sperm are found after centrifugation.StrongPerform a comprehensive assessment, including detailed medical history, hormonal profile, genetic tests and scrotal ultrasound to investigate the underlying aetiology and associated co-morbidity in patients with NOA.StrongGenetic counselling is mandatory in couples with genetic abnormalities prior to any assisted reproductive technology.StrongPerform surgery for sperm retrieval in men who are candidates for assisted reproductive technology (i.e., ICSI).StrongDo not perform surgery for sperm retrieval in patients with complete AZFa and AZFb microdeletions, since the chance of sperm retrieval is zero.StrongDo not perform fine needle aspiration mapping (FNA) and testicular sperm aspiration (TESA) in patients with NOA.StrongDo not perform FNA mapping as a prognostic procedure prior to definitive testicular sperm extraction (any type) in patients with NOA in routine clinical practice.WeakUse microdissection TESE as the treatment of choice to retrieve sperm in patients with NOA.WeakDo not consider pre-operative biochemical and clinical variables as sufficient and reliable predictors of sperm retrieval outcome at surgery in patients with NOA.WeakDo not routinely use medical therapy, e.g. hormonal stimulation iin men with NOA and hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism before TESE (any type) to improve sperm recovery.Weak 