11.6.1. Obstructive azoospermia. Obstructive azoospermia (OA) is the absence of spermatozoa in the sediment of a centrifuged sample of ejaculate due to obstruction [1769]. OA occurs in 20-40% of men with azoospermia [1847,1848] and it is characterised by normal FSH values, testes of normal size and epididymal enlargement [1849]. The most common causes of OA are reported in Table 42. Table 42: Causes of obstruction of the genitourinary system Intratesticular (15%)Epididymis (30-67%)Infection (acute/chronic epididymitis)TraumaPost-surgical iatrogenic obstruction (i.e., MESA, hydrocelectomy or other scrotal surgery)Congenital epididymal obstruction (usually manifests as congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens [CBAVD])Other congenital forms of epididymal obstruction (Young’s syndrome)Vas deferensVasectomyVasotomy/vasography (with improper technique)Post-surgical iatrogenic obstruction (i.e., scrotal surgery or herniorraphy)Congenital unilateral (CUAVD) or bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD)Ejaculatory ductsCysts (Mullerian utricular, prostatic or seminal vesicular)Infection (acute/chronic epididymitis)TraumaticPostsurgical iatrogenic obstructionFunctional obstructionIdiopathic/acquired local neurogenic dysfunction 11.6.1.1. Diagnostic evaluation Clinical history-taking should follow the investigation and diagnostic evaluation of infertile men (See Section 11.3). Risk factors for obstruction include prior surgery, iatrogenic injury during inguinal herniorrhaphy, orchidopexy or hydrocelectomy. 11.6.1.1.1. Clinical examination Clinical examination should follow the guidelines for the diagnostic evaluation of infertile men. Obstructive azoospermia is indicated by at least one testis with a volume > 15 mL, although a smaller volume may be found in some patients with: obstructive azoospermia and concomitant partial testicular failure;enlarged and dilated epididymis;nodules in the epididymis or vas deferens;absence or partial atresia of the vas deferens. When semen volume is low, or absent a search must be made for spermatozoa in urine after ejaculation. Absence of spermatozoa and immature germ cells in the semen pellet suggest complete seminal duct obstruction. 11.6.1.1.2. Hormone levels Hormones including FSH and inhibin-B should be normal, but do not exclude other causes of testicular azoospermia (e.g., NOA). Although inhibin‐B concentration is a good index of Sertoli cell integrity reflecting closely the state of spermatogenesis, its diagnostic value is no better than that of FSH and its use in clinical practice has not been widely advocated [1850]. 11.6.1.1.3. Genetic testing Cystic fibrose transmembrane conductance regulator gene testing should be performed in any patient with unilateral or bilateral absence of the vas deferens or seminal vesicle agenesis [1851]. 11.6.1.1.4. Testicular biopsy Testis biopsies (including fine needle aspiration [FNA]) without performing simultaneously a therapeutic sperm retrieval are not recommended, as this will require a subsequent invasive procedure. Furthermore, even patients with extremes of spermatogenic failure (e.g., Sertoli Cell Only syndrome [SCOS]) may harbour focal areas of spermatogenesis [1852,1853]. 11.6.1.2. Disease management 11.6.1.2.1. Sperm retrieval Intratesticular obstruction Only TESE allows sperm retrieval in these patients and is therefore recommended. Epididymal obstruction Microsurgical epididymal sperm aspiration (MESA) or percutaneous epididymal sperm aspiration (PESA) [1854] is indicated in men with CBAVD. Testicular sperm extraction and percutaneous techniques, such as testicular sperm aspiration (TESA), are also options [1855]. The source of sperm used for ICSI in cases of OA and the aetiology of the obstruction do not affect the outcome in terms of fertilisation, pregnancy, or miscarriage rates [1856]. Usually, one MESA procedure provides sufficient material for a number of ICSI cycles [1857] and it produces high pregnancy and fertilisation rates [1858]. Overall, pregnancy outcomes from ICSI in men with OA are comparable between epididymal and testicular sperm and also between fresh and frozen–thawed epididymal sperm [1859]. However, these results are from studies of low evidence [1575]. In patients with OA due to acquired epididymal obstruction and with a female partner with good ovarian reserve, microsurgical epididymovasostomy (EV) is recommended [1860]. Epididymovasostomy can be performed with different techniques such as end-to-site and intussusception [1861]. Anatomical recanalisation following surgery may require 3-18 months. A systematic review indicated that the time to patency in EV varies between 2.8 to 6.6 months. Reports of late failure are heterogeneous and vary between 1 and 50% [1862]. Before microsurgery, and in all cases in which recanalisation is impossible, epididymal spermatozoa should be aspirated intra-operatively by MESA and cryopreserved to be used for subsequent ICSI procedures [1863]. Patency rates range between 65% and 85% and cumulative pregnancy rates between 21% and 44% [1864,1865]. Recanalisation success rates may be adversely affected by pre-operative and intra-operative findings. Robot-assisted EV has similar success rates but larger studies are needed [1866]. Vas deferens obstruction after vasectomy Vas deferens obstruction after vasectomy requires microsurgical vasectomy reversal. The mean post-procedural patency and pregnancy rates weighted by sample size were 90-97% and 52-73%, respectively [1864,1865]. The average time to patency is 1.7-4.3 months and late failures are uncommon (0-12%) [1862]. Robot-assisted vasovasostomy has similar success rates, and larger studies, including cost-benefit analysis, are needed to establish its benefits over standard microsurgical procedures [1866]. The absence of spermatozoa in the intra-operative vas deferens fluid suggests the presence of a secondary epididymal obstruction, especially if the seminal fluid of the proximal vas deferens has a thick “toothpaste” appearance; in this case microsurgical EV may be indicated [1867-1869]. Simultaneous sperm retrieval may be performed for future cryopreservation and use for ICSI; likewise, patients should be counselled appropriately. Vas deferens obstruction at the inguinal level It is usually impossible to correct large bilateral vas deferens defects, resulting from involuntary excision of the vasa deferentia during hernia surgery in early childhood or previous orchidopexy. In these cases, TESE/MESA/PESA or proximal vas deferens sperm aspiration [1870] can be used for cryopreservation for future ICSI. Ejaculatory duct obstruction The treatment of ejaculatory duct obstruction (EDO) depends on its aetiology. Transurethral resection of the ejaculatory ducts (TURED) can be used in post-inflammatory obstruction and cystic obstruction [1863,1871]. Resection may remove part of the verumontanum. In cases of obstruction due to a midline intraprostatic cyst, incision, unroofing or aspiration of the cyst is required [1863,1871]. Pregnancy rates after TURED are 20-25% [1696,1871,1872]. Complications following TURED include epididymitis, UTI, gross haematuria, haematospermia, azoospermia (in cases with partial distal ejaculatory duct obstruction) and urine reflux into the ejaculatory ducts and seminal vesicles [1871]. Alternative therapies for EDO include, seminal vesiculoscopy to remove debris or calculi and balloon dilation and laser incision for calcification on TRUS [1873]. The alternatives to TURED are MESA, PESA, TESE, proximal vas deferens sperm aspiration and seminal vesicle-ultrasonically guided aspiration. 11.6.1.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for obstructive azoospermia Summary of evidenceLEObstructive lesions of the seminal tract are frequent in azoospermic or severely oligozoospermic patients, usually with normal-sized testes and normal reproductive hormones.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform microsurgical vasovasostomy or epididymovasostomy for azoospermia caused by epididymal or vasal obstruction in men with female partners of good ovarian reserve.StrongUse sperm retrieval techniques, such as microsurgical epididymal sperm aspiration (MESA), testicular sperm extraction (TESE) and percutaneous techniques (PESA and TESA) either as an adjunct to reconstructive surgery, or if the condition is not amenable to surgical repair, or when the ovarian reserve of the partner is limited or patient preference is not to undertake a surgical reconstruction and the couple prefer to proceed to ICSI treatment directly.Strong 