6.5. Systemic treatments for prostate cancer. 6.5.1. Hormonal therapy 6.5.1.1. Different types of hormonal therapy Androgen deprivation can be achieved by suppressing the secretion of testicular androgens in different ways. This can be combined with inhibiting the action of circulating androgens at the level of their receptor which has been known as complete (or maximal or total) androgen blockade (CAB) using the old-fashioned antiandrogens [1034]. 6.5.1.2. Castration level The castration level of testosterone is < 50 ng/dL (1.7 nmol/L), which was defined more than 40 years ago when testosterone testing was less sensitive. Current methods have shown that the mean value after surgical castration is 15 ng/dL [1035]. Therefore, a more appropriate level should be defined as < 20 ng/dL ( < 0.7 nmol/L). This definition is important as better results are repeatedly observed with lower testosterone levels compared to 50 ng/dL [1036-1038]. However, the castrate level considered by the regulatory authorities and in clinical trials addressing castration in PCa is still the historical < 50 ng/dL (1.7 nmol/L). 6.5.1.3. Bilateral orchiectomy Bilateral orchiectomy or subcapsular pulpectomy is still considered the primary treatment modality for ADT. It is a simple, cheap and virtually complication-free surgical procedure. It is easily performed under local anaesthesia, and it is the quickest way to achieve a castration level which is usually reached within less than twelve hours. It is irreversible and therefore does not allow for intermittent treatment [1039]. 6.5.1.4. Oestrogens Treatment with oestrogens results in testosterone suppression and is not associated with bone loss [1040]. Early studies tested oral diethylstilboestrol (DES) at several doses. Due to severe side effects, especially thromboembolic complications, even at lower doses these drugs are not considered as standard first-line treatment [1041,1042]. Oestrogen patches are under investigation [1043]. 6.5.1.5. Luteinising-hormone-releasing hormone agonists Long-acting LHRH agonists are currently the main forms of ADT. These synthetic analogues of LHRH are delivered as depot injections on a 1-, 2-, 3-, 6-monthly, or yearly basis. The first injection induces a transient rise in luteinising hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) leading to the ‘testosterone surge’ or ‘flare-up’ phenomenon which starts two to three days after administration and lasts for about one week. This may lead to detrimental clinical effects (the clinical flare) such as increased bone pain, acute bladder outlet obstruction, obstructive renal failure, spinal cord compression, and cardiovascular death due to hypercoagulation status [1044]. Patients at risk are usually those with high-volume symptomatic bony disease. Concomitant therapy with an anti-androgen decreases the incidence of clinical flare but does not completely remove the risk. Anti-androgen therapy is usually continued for four weeks but neither the timing nor the duration of anti-androgen therapy are based on strong evidence. In addition, the long-term impact of preventing ‘flare up’ is unknown [1045]. Chronic exposure to LHRH agonists results in the down-regulation of LHRH-receptors, suppressing LH and FSH secretion and therefore testosterone production. A castration level is usually obtained within two to four weeks [1046]. Although there is no formal direct comparison between the various compounds, they are considered to be equally effective [1047]. So far, no survival difference between LHRH agonists and orchiectomy has been reported due to the lack of high-quality trials [1048].The different products have practical differences that need to be considered in everyday practice, including the storage temperature, whether a drug is ready for immediate use or requires reconstitution, and whether a drug is given by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection. 6.5.1.6. Luteinising-hormone-releasing hormone antagonists Luteinising-hormone-releasing hormone antagonists immediately bind to LHRH receptors, leading to a rapid decrease in LH, FSH and testosterone levels without any flare. The practical shortcoming of these compounds is the lack of a long-acting depot formulation with, so far, only monthly formulations being available. Degarelix is a LHRH antagonist. The standard dosage is 240 mg in the first month followed by monthly injections of 80 mg. Most patients achieve a castrate level at day three [1046]. A phase III RCT compared degarelix to monthly leuprorelin following up patients for twelve months, suggesting a better PSA PFS for degarelix 240/80 mg compared to monthly leuprorelin [1049]. A SR did not show a major difference between agonists and degarelix and highlighted the paucity of on-treatment data beyond twelve months as well as the lack of survival data [1050]. Its definitive superiority over the LHRH analogues remains to be proven. Short-term follow-up data from a meta-analysis indicate that the use of LHRH antagonist is associated with significantly lower overall mortality and cardiovascular events as compared with agonists. On the other hand, other adverse effects such as decreased libido, hot flushes, ED, weight gain, and injection site reactions are seen less often with the agonists [1051,1052]. Relugolix is an oral LHRH antagonist. It was compared to the LHRH agonist leuprolide in a randomised phase III trial [1053]. The primary endpoint was sustained testosterone suppression to castrate levels through 48 weeks. There was a significant difference of 7.9 percentage points (95% CI: 4.1–11.8) showing non-inferiority and superiority of relugolix. The incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events was significantly lower with relugolix (prespecified safety analysis). Relugolix has been approved by the FDA [1054] and EMA [1055] for hormone sensitive PCa. 6.5.1.7. Anti-androgens These oral compounds are classified according to their chemical structure as: steroidal, e.g., cyproterone acetate (CPA), megestrol acetate and medroxyprogesteroneacetate;non-steroidal or pure, e.g., nilutamide, flutamide and bicalutamide. Both classes compete with androgens at the receptor level. This leads to an unchanged or slightly elevated testosterone level. Conversely, steroidal anti-androgens have progestational properties leading to central inhibition by crossing the blood-brain barrier. 6.5.1.7.1. Steroidal anti-androgens These compounds are synthetic derivatives of hydroxyprogesterone. Their main pharmacological side effects are secondary to castration (gynaecomastia is quite rare) whilst the non-pharmacological side effects are cardiovascular toxicity (4–40% for CPA) and hepatotoxicity. Cyproterone acetate was the first licensed anti-androgen but the least studied. Its most effective dose as monotherapy is still unknown. Although CPA has a relatively long half-life (31–41 hours), it is usually administered in two or three fractionated doses of 100 mg each. In one RCT CPA showed a poorer OS when compared with LHRH analogues [1056]. An underpowered RCT comparing CPA monotherapy with flutamide in M1b PCa did not show any difference in DSS and OS at a median follow-up of 8.6 years [1057]. Other CPA monotherapy studies suffer from methodological limitations preventing firm conclusions. 6.5.1.7.2. Non-steroidal anti-androgens Non-steroidal anti-androgen monotherapy with e.g. nilutamide, flutamide or bicalutamide does not suppress testosterone secretion and it is claimed that libido, overall physical performance and bone mineral density (BMD) are frequently preserved [1058]. Non-androgen-related pharmacological side effects differ between agents. Bicalutamide shows a more favourable safety and tolerability profile than flutamide and nilutamide [1059]. The dosage licensed for use in CAB is 50 mg/day, and 150 mg/day for monotherapy. The androgen pharmacological side effects are mainly gynaecomastia (70%) and breast pain (68%). However, non-steroidal anti-androgen monotherapy offers clear bone protection compared with LHRH analogues and probably LHRH antagonists [1058,1060]. All three agents share the potential for liver toxicity (occasionally fatal), requiring regular monitoring of patients’ liver enzymes. 6.5.1.7.3. New androgen receptor pathway inhibitors (ARPis) Once on ADT the development of castration-resistance (CRPC) is only a matter of time. It is considered to be mediated through two main overlapping mechanisms: androgen-receptor (AR)-independent and AR-dependent mechanisms (see Section 6.5 - Castrate-resistant PCa). In CRPC, the intracellular androgen level is increased compared to androgen sensitive cells and an over-expression of the AR has been observed, suggesting an adaptive mechanism [1061]. This has led to the development of several new compounds targeting the androgen axis. In mCRPC, abiraterone acetate and enzalutamide have been approved. In addition to ADT (sustained castration), abiraterone acetate, apalutamide and enzalutamide have been approved for the treatment of metastatic hormone sensitive PCa (mHSPC) by the FDA and the EMA. For the updated approval status see EMA and FDA websites [1032,1062-1065]. Finally, apalutamide, darolutamide and enzalutamide have been approved for non-metastatic CRPC (nmCRPC) at high risk of further metastases [1066-1070]. 6.5.1.7.3.1. Abiraterone acetate Abiraterone acetate is a CYP17 inhibitor (a combination of 17α-hydrolase and 17,20-lyase inhibition). By blocking CYP17, abiraterone acetate significantly decreases the intracellular testosterone level by suppressing its synthesis at the adrenal level and inside the cancer cells (intracrine mechanism). This compound must be used together with prednisone/prednisolone to prevent drug-induced hyperaldosteronism [1062,1064]. 6.5.1.7.3.2. Apalutamide, darolutamide, enzalutamide (alphabetical order) These agents are novel non-steroidal anti-androgens with a higher affinity for the AR receptor than traditional non-steroidal anti-androgens. In addition, while previous non-steroidal anti-androgens still allow transfer of ARs to the nucleus and would act as partial agonists, all three agents also block AR transfer and therefore suppress any possible agonist-like activity [1065-1067]. Darolutamide has structurally unique properties In particular, in preclinical studies, it was shown not to cross the blood-brain barrier [1071,1072]. 6.5.2. Cytotoxic drug treatment 6.5.2.1. Taxanes Paclitaxel derivatives promote the assembly of microtubules and inhibit the subsequent depolymeization, impairing the tubulin dynamics that foster the mitotic spindle assembly during interphase in mitosis [1073]. Docetaxel binds ß-tubulin dimers in a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio, exhibiting a stronger dynamic instability using its inhibitory effect in tubulin depolymerization [1074]. It also activates NF-kB causing apoptosis via a mitochondria-dependent pathway [1075]. Docetaxel shows significant activity against prostatetumours. Cabazitaxel also works by binding to the microtubules. This prevents cellular mitosis and stabilises the tumour cells. As a result, the cells do not divide. In addition, it inhibits androgen receptors by binding to the microtubules and microtubule-associated motor protein dynein. As a consequence, androgen receptor nuclear translocation is prevented [1073]. Common side-effects include peripheral neuropathy, myalgias, neutropenia and arthralgia. 6.5.3. Non-hormonal non-cytotoxic drug treatments 6.5.3.1. Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitirs (PARPi) Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) block the enzyme poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) and were developed aiming to selectively target cancer cells harbouring BRCA mutations and other mutations inducing homologous recombination deficiency and high level of replication pressure with a sensitivity to PARPi treatment. Due to the oncogenic loss of some DNA repair effectors and incomplete DNA repair repertoire, some cancer cells are addicted to certain DNA repair pathways such as Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)-related single-strand break repair pathway. The interaction between BRCA and PARP is a form of synthetic lethal effect which means the simultaneously functional loss of two genes leads to cell death, while a defect in any single gene only has a limited effect on cell viability [1076]. The therapeutic indications for PCa are discussed in Sections 6.5.8.1. 6.5.3.2. AKT inhibitors AKT inhibitors are small molecules which are designed to target and bind to all three isoforms of AKT, which is a key component of the PI3K/AKT pathway. In clinical trials, ipatasertib, an oral, highly specific, AKT inhibitor was used and showed significant activity when combined with abiraterone acetate in patients with loss of the tumour suppressor protein PTEN on immunohistochemistry within the tumour [1077,1078]. Available data can be found in table 6.5.2. Currently, there are no approved AKT inhibitors. 6.5.3.3. Immune checkpoint inhibitors Checkpoint inhibitors target the molecules CTLA4, programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1). For advanced PCa patients that are microsatellite instability-high/deficient mismatch repair (MSI-H/dMMR), the PD-1 inhibitor pembrolizumab has been approved by the FDA but not by the EMA. The label is tumour agnostic [1079,1080]. See also Section 6.6.2.1 6.5.3.4. Radiopharmaceutical therapy Radiopharmaceutical therapy (RPT) is based on the delivery of radioactive isotopes to tumour-associated targets. The mechanism of action for RPT is radiation-induced killing of cells. Radionuclides with different emission properties are used to deliver radiation. The most commonly used radionuclides are represented by β-particles (e.g., 177Lu) or α-particles (e.g., 223Ra, 225Ac). 177Lu is increasingly used because of its optimal imaging range (100–200 keV), favourable half time (6.6 days) and appropriate β-particle energy for therapy. The short path of the β-particles (0.05–0.08 mm) results in minimal toxic effects in adjacent healthy tissue. These properties enable such radionuclides to be used as theranostics (i.e., the same radionuclide may be used for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes). However, an essential requirement prior to any RPT is to assess the targeting of the agent, mainly using PET techniques which show the tumour expression and the extent of cancer [1081]. 177Lu has been approved by the FDA for the treatment of adult patients with PSMA-positive mCRPC who have been treated with ARPI and taxane-based chemotherapy [1082,1083]. Clinical details are discussed in Section 6.6.8. 