3.3. Pathology. 3.3.1. Handling of transurethral resection and cystectomy specimens During transurethral resection (TUR), a specimen from the tumour and normal looking bladder wall should be taken, if possible. Specimens should be taken from the superficial and deep areas of the tumour and sent to the pathology laboratory separately, in case the outcome will impact on treatment decisions. If random biopsies of the flat mucosa are taken, each biopsy specimen of the flat mucosa should be submitted separately [54]. The sampling sites must be recorded by the urologist; the pathologist report should include location of tumour tissue in the cystectomy specimen. Anatomical tumour location is relevant for staging and prognosis [55,56]. In RC, bladder fixation must be carried out as soon as possible. The pathologist must open the specimen from the urethra to the bladder dome and fix the specimen. In a female cystectomy specimen, the length of the urethral segment removed en bloc with the specimen should be checked, preferably by the urological surgeon [57]. Specimen handling should follow the general rules as published by a collaborative group of pathologists and urologists [58,59]. It must be stressed that it may be very difficult to confirm the presence of a neoplastic lesion using gross examination of the cystectomy specimen after TUR or chemotherapy, so the entire retracted or ulcerated area should be inked and included before fixation. It is compulsory to study the urethra, the ureters, the prostate in men and the radial margins [60]. In urethra-sparing cystectomy; the level of urethral dissection, completeness of the prostate, specifically at the apex (in men), and the inclusion of the entire bladder neck and amount of adjacent urethra, uterus and vaginal vault (in women) have to be documented by the pathologist. All lymph node (LN) specimens should be provided in their totality, in clearly labelled containers to allow for pTNM staging. In case of doubt or adipose differentiation of the LNs, the entire specimen is to be included. Lymph nodes should be counted and measured on slides; capsular extension and percentage of LN invasion should be reported as well as vascular embols [61,62]. In case of metastatic spread in the perivesical fat without real LN structures (capsule, subcapsular sinus), this localisation should nevertheless be considered as N+. Potentially positive soft tissue margins should be inked by the pathologist for evaluation [63]. In rare cases, fresh frozen sections may be helpful to determine treatment strategy [64]. 3.3.2. Pathology of muscle-invasive bladder cancer All MIBC cases are high-grade UCs. For this reason, no prognostic information can be provided by grading MIBC [65]. Identification of morphological subtypes is important for prognostic reasons and treatment decisions [66-68]. The data presented in these guidelines are based on the 2004/2016 World Health Organization (WHO) classifications [69,70]. An update was presented in 2022 [71]. Currently the following subtypes of UC are used [71,72]: urothelial carcinoma (more than 90% of cases);urothelial carcinomas with partial squamous and/or glandular or divergent differentiation;micropapillary UC;nested/microcystic;large nested;microtubular UC;plasmacytoid, signet ring;lymphoepithelioma-like;giant cell, diffuse, undifferentiated;sarcomatoid UC;some UCs with other rare differentiations;urothelial carcinomas with partial NE (neuroendocrine differentiation, % to be given);pure neuroendocrine carcinoma (including small and large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas [Chapter NE carcinomas in the genitourinary tract]). In the new WHO 2022 all subtypes are considered HG [71]. The percentage of subtype in the specimen must be reported since it has been shown to be of prognostic value [73]. The majority of subtypes are MIBC, with no more than 15–30% being non-muscle invasive [73-80] (LE: 3). 3.3.3. Guidelines for the assessment of tumour specimens RecommendationsStrength ratingRecord the depth of invasion for the entire specimen (categories pT2a and pT2b, pT3a and pT3b or pT4a and pT4b).StrongRecord margins with special attention paid to the radial margin, prostate, ureter, urethra, peritoneal fat, uterus and vaginal vault.Record the total number of lymph nodes (LNs), the number of positive LNs and extranodal spread.Record lymphovascular invasion.Record the presence of carcinoma in situ.Record the sampling sites as well as information on tumour size when providing specimens to the pathologist. 3.3.4. EAU-ESMO consensus statements on the management of advanced- and variant bladder cancer [81,82]* Consensus statementBladder UC with small cell neuroendocrine variant should be treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by consolidating local therapy.Muscle-invasive pure SCC of the bladder should be treated with primary radical cystectomy and lymphadenectomy.Muscle-invasive pure adenocarcinoma of the bladder should be treated with primary radical cystectomy and lymphadenectomy.Muscle-invasive small cell neuroendocrine variant of bladder UC should not receive preventive brain irradiation to avoid brain recurrence.Differentiating between urachal and non-urachal subtypes of adenocarcinoma is essential when making treatment decisions.T1 high-grade bladder urothelial cancer with micropapillary histology (established after complete TURBT and/or re-TURBT) should be treated with immediate radical cystectomy and lymphadenectomy. *Only statements which met the a priori consensus threshold across all three stakeholder groups are listed(defined as ≥ 70% agreement and ≤ 15% disagreement, or vice versa). 