4.1. According to stricture location. Classification according to stricture location is important as this will affect further management. 4.1.1. In males 4.1.1.1. Anterior urethra The anterior urethra runs from the meatus to the urogenital diaphragm and is surrounded in its entire length by the corpus spongiosum [11,140]. Further subdivision is made in three different areas (from distal to proximal) [12]: Meatal strictures: these strictures are located at the external urethral meatus and may extend into the fossa navicularis of the glans. Penile strictures: these are located in the segment between the fossa navicularis and the bulbar urethra. Externally, the penile urethra begins approximately at the balanopreputial sulcus and continues to the penoscrotal junction. The whole penile urethral segment lies in the groove ventral to corpora cavernosa and is surrounded by a thin layer of corpus spongiosum. Bulbar strictures: the bulbar urethra starts at the penoscrotal junction and is surrounded by the bulbospongious muscle. It ends in the membranous urethra proximally at the level of the urogenital diaphragm. The bulbar urethra can be subdivided into a proximal and distal part. The proximal bulbar urethra is defined as the segment within 5 cm of the membranous urethra; the urethra lies eccentrically in this part with abundant ventral spongious tissue. The distal bulbar urethra is defined as the adjoining segment extending to the penoscrotal junction [141]. Strictures extending towards the membranous urethra are termed bulbomembranous strictures (BMS). Penobulbar strictures: these extend from the penile urethra into the bulbar segment, compromising long segments of urethra. The difference between penobulbar strictures and multifocal strictures should be noted. The latter are defined by two or more narrowed segments, either in the same or different subdivision of the urethra but preserving healthy lengths of urethra between them (e.g., iatrogenic strictures related to TUR procedures which typically affect the fossa navicularis and the penoscrotal junction with healthy urethra in between). 4.1.1.2. Posterior urethra The posterior urethra is approximately 5 cm long, with three different segments [12]: The membranous urethra is the area of the urethra traversing the urogenital diaphragm, between the proximal bulbar and the distal verumontanum.The prostatic urethra runs through the prostatic gland, starting at the proximal membranous urethra and extending to the bladder neck.The bladder neck is surrounded by the internal urinary sphincter and is the junction between the prostatic urethra and the bladder. Stenosis (or contracture) of the bladder neck implies a prostate in situ (i.e., after TURP or simple prostatectomies). If the narrowing or obliteration appears at this level but after a RP, the correct term is VUAS [12]. 4.1.2. In females The female urethra is approximately 4 cm long and arbitrarily divided in an upper, mid, and lower part [15,125,127,128,130-132,137,139]. 