4.3. Mixed urinary incontinence. The term MUI is broad because it may refer to equal stress and urgency symptoms, stress-predominant symptoms, urgency-predominant symptoms, urodynamic stress urinary incontinence (USUI or USI) with DO or USUI with clinical urgency symptoms, but no DO [434]. The challenge of this broad definition is that it leads to inconsistencies when evaluating treatment options and outcomes. 4.3.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology The prevalence rates of MUI vary widely in the literature. Most epidemiological studies have either not considered subtypes of UI, or only reported on SUI, UUI and MUI. The current literature is unclear regarding the population prevalence and risks for the different UI subtypes [435]. There are many urinary symptom questionnaires used in epidemiological research, with varying evidence of validity. Caution is needed when comparing epidemiological studies that do or do not report a separate MUI subgroup, and when generalising from population level data to clinical practice. The problems arise from significant heterogeneity in terms of types of questionnaires/surveys used, population parameters, variable response rates, varying definitions of MUI, and outcome measures. It seems apparent, however, that MUI is the second most common form of UI, after SUI, with most studies reporting a 7.5–25% prevalence [435]. One can extrapolate that among women with UI, approximately one-third have MUI [436]. In a secondary analysis of a large clinical trial, 655 women were evaluated for UI and their response to treatment [437]. It was found that 50−90% of women fell into the category of MUI based on patient-reported answers to the Medical Epidemiologic and Social Aspects of Aging and Urinary Distress Inventory (UDI) questionnaires. However, when objective criteria such as urodynamic findings were used, only 8% of women were categorised as having MUI. Mixed urinary incontinence is usually caused by a combination of the same factors that cause SUI and UUI. Several factors may be responsible for its development, including oestrogen deficiency, abnormalities in histomorphology, and microstructural changes [438]. One report postulates that an incompetent sphincter and bladder neck allow urine to enter the proximal urethra during stress, causing a urethro-detrusor reflex that triggers involuntary detrusor contraction, which then causes urgency and UUI [439]. Another study has shown that urine flow across the urethral mucosa increases the excitability of the micturition reflex [440]. Ultimately, it is unlikely that one theory or risk factor can explain the development of MUI and its symptoms; it is more probable that disturbances in several elements and the lack of bladder compensation results in the development of MUI [438]. 4.3.2. Diagnostic evaluation Assessment of patients with MUI begins with a thorough history of the patient’s urinary symptoms and follows the recommendations set out in the general evaluation and diagnosis of LUTS in Chapter 3. It is conventional to try and categorise MUI as either stress or urge predominant. Mixed urinary incontinence is difficult to diagnose, as the condition comprises many phenotypes. Some women exhibit detrusor contractions provoked by physical stressors, some have unprovoked detrusor contractions, and many have no abnormal detrusor contractions, but still report urine leakage with the sensation of urgency. Some women with urgency symptoms do not manifest UUI because their urethral sphincter is strong and often able to prevent urine leakage [441]. The role of urodynamics in MUI is unclear but establishing objective degrees of SUI and DO incontinence may help in counselling patients about the most appropriate initial treatment option. 4.3.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnosis of mixed urinary incontinence Summary of evidenceLEThere is no evidence that urodynamics affects outcomes of treatment for MUI.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingComplete a thorough history and examination as part of the assessment of mixed urinary incontinence (MUI).StrongCharacterise MUI as either stress-predominant or urgency-predominant where possible.WeakUse bladder diaries and urodynamics as part of the multimodal assessment of MUI to help inform the most appropriate management strategy.Strong 4.3.3. Disease management 4.3.3.1. Conservative management Women with MUI generally have more severe symptoms and respond less well to treatment than women with only SUI or UUI [442]. Clinicians are encouraged to begin treatment for MUI with conservative management directed toward the most bothersome component of the symptom spectrum and to reserve surgery as a last resort [441]. 4.3.3.1.1. Pelvic floor muscle training An RCT comparing PFMT with and without an audiotape for 71 women with UI did not find any difference between the two treatment arms [443]. Mean number of incontinent episodes per day decreased from 3.9 overall to 3.2 for participants with MUI. Six months after completing the course of exercises, approximately one third of all enrolees reported that they continued to note good or excellent improvement and desired no further treatment. A small RCT including 34 women with SUI and MUI compared eight weeks of PFMT with no treatment and found that PFMT significantly increased PFM strength, improving QoL, and reduced the frequency of UI episodes compared to no treatment [444]. Another RCT including SUI and MUI confirmed these results [445]. A multicentre randomised controlled non-inferiority trial on 467 women with MUI was conducted in ten hospitals. Participants were randomised 1:1 to receive EA (36 sessions over twelve weeks with 24 weeks of follow-up) or PFMT–solifenacin (5 mg/day) over 36 weeks. In women with moderate-to-severe MUI, EA was not inferior to PFMT–solifenacin in decreasing the 72-hour incontinence episodes (between-group difference, –1.34%) [446]. In a comparative study of the effectiveness of behavioural therapy and PFMT (combined with MUS vs. sling alone in women with MUI), 416 (86.7%) had post-baseline outcome data and were included in the primary twelve-month analyses [447]. The UDI score in both groups significantly decreased (178.0 to 30.7 points in the combined group, 176.8 to 34.5 points in the sling-only group). The model estimated between-group difference, did not meet the minimal clinically important difference threshold. Adherence to the behavioural therapy and PFMT regimes, which is a prerequisite for achieving a satisfactory outcome, was not reported in the study. A Cochrane review comparing PFMT with no or sham treatment included 31 RCTs from fourteen countries, but there was only one study including women with MUI and one with UUI and none of them reported data on cure, improvement, or number of episodes of these subgroups [316]. The effect of combining biofeedback with PFMT has already been fully addressed in Section 4.2.4.1.3, and there was no evidence of any additional benefit in a population with predominantly MUI. 4.3.3.1.2. Bladder training Details on BT programmes are given in Section 4.2.4. The ICI 2017 [322] concluded that for women with UUI or MUI, PFMT and BT are effective first-line conservative therapies. One RCT assigned 108 women with diagnoses of SUI (n = 50), UUI (n = 16), or MUI (n = 42) to six weeks of BT and PFMT or BT alone [448]. Overall, and in the SUI and MUI subgroups, significantly more patients in the BT and PFMT group reported cure and improved symptoms. 4.3.3.1.3. Electrical stimulation A Cochrane review on ES for SUI included participants with SUI or stress-predominant MUI. Twenty-five percent of the included trials were deemed to have a high risk of bias due to a variety of factors, including baseline differences between groups and industry funding. For subjective cure or improvement of SUI, low-quality evidence indicated that ES was better than no active treatment or sham treatment. Electrical stimulation for OAB and SUI is covered in Sections 4.1.4.1.5.4 and 4.2.4.1.3.2. 4.3.3.2. Summary of evidence and recommendations for conservative management in mixed urinary incontinence Summary of evidenceLEPelvic floor muscle training appears less effective for MUI than for SUI alone.2Pelvic floor muscle training is better than no treatment for improving UI and QoL in women with MUI.1aBladder training combined with PFMT may be beneficial in the treatment of MUI.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingTreat the most bothersome symptom first in patients with mixed urinary incontinence (MUI).WeakOffer bladder training as a first-line therapy to adults with MUI.StrongOffer supervised intensive pelvic floor muscle training, lasting at least three months, as a first-line therapy to all women with MUI (including elderly and postnatal women).Strong 4.3.3.3. Pharmacological management Many RCTs include patients with MUI with predominant symptoms of either SUI or UUI but few report outcomes separately for those with MUI compared to pure SUI or UUI groups. 4.3.3.3.1. Anticholinergics In an RCT of 854 women with MUI, tolterodine ER was effective for improvement of UUI but not SUI, suggesting that the efficacy of tolterodine for UUI was not altered by the presence of SUI [449]. In another study (n = 1,380) tolterodine was equally effective in reducing urgency and UUI symptoms, regardless of whether there was associated SUI [450]. Similar results were found for solifenacin [451,452]. 4.3.3.3.2. Duloxetine In one RCT of duloxetine vs. placebo, 588 women were stratified into either stress-predominant, urgency-predominant or balanced MUI groups. Duloxetine was effective for improvement of incontinence and QoL in all subgroups, although results in the stress-predominant groups were better [453]. Treatment-emergent adverse event rate in the duloxetine group was 61.3% with discontinuation rates of 15.7%. Adverse event rates were higher in those participants taking other concomitant antidepressant agents. Duloxetine was found to have equal efficacy for SUI and MUI in an RCT (n = 553) following secondary analysis of respective subpopulations, but no adverse events data were reported [454]. 4.3.3.3.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for pharmacological management of mixed urinary incontinence Summary of evidenceLELimited evidence suggests that anticholinergic drugs are effective for improvement of the UUI component in patients with MUI.2Duloxetine is effective for improvement of both SUI and MUI symptoms, but adverse event rates are high.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingTreat the most bothersome symptom first in patients with mixed urinary incontinence (MUI).WeakOffer anticholinergic drugs or beta-3 agonists to patients with urgency-predominant MUI.StrongOffer duloxetine (where licensed) to selected patients with stress-predominant MUI unresponsive to other conservative treatments and who want to avoid invasive treatment, counselling carefully about the risk of adverse events.Weak 4.3.3.4. Surgical management The surgical treatment options for MUI, include all the anti-incontinence procedures as outlined in the SUI Section 4.2.4.3. Many RCTs include patients with pure SUI or pure UUI as well as patients with MUI. However, few RCTs report separate outcomes for MUI subgroups. Post hoc analysis of a large RCT showed that in women undergoing either autologous fascial sling or Burch colposuspension, the outcomes were poorer for women with a concomitant complaint of preoperative urgency [432]. A similar post hoc review of another RCT comparing transobturator and retropubic MUS showed that the greater the severity of preoperative urgency, the more likely that treatment would fail [98]. However, an earlier study had found that surgery provided similar outcomes, whether or not urgency was present prior to surgery (this study included only a few patients with urodynamic DO). Another RCT including 93 patients with MUI showed a significant improvement in continence and QoL in the group that had TVT and botulinum toxin A (Botox®) rather than with either treatment alone [455]. In a secondary analysis of a study of transobturator TVTs in the treatment of women with urodynamic MUI, no difference in patient-reported success rates was found between the vagina-to-skin (inside-out) and the skin-to vagina (outside-in) groups (63.2% and 65.5%, respectively) at nine years’ follow-up [398]. Analysis of the trial populations included in the meta-analysis on single-incision slings suggests that the evidence can be generalised to women who have predominantly SUI, and no other clinically severe LUT dysfunction. The evidence is not adequate to guide choice of surgical treatment for those women with MUI, severe POP, or a history of previous surgery for SUI. Research trials should define accurately what is meant by MUI. There is a need for well-designed trials comparing treatments in populations with MUI, and in which the type of MUI has been accurately defined. 4.3.3.4.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for surgery in patients with mixed urinary incontinence Summary of evidenceLEWomen with MUI are less likely to be cured of their UI by SUI surgery than women with SUI alone.2The response of pre-existing urgency symptoms to SUI surgery is unpredictable.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingTreat the most bothersome symptom first in patients with mixed urinary incontinence (MUI).WeakWarn women that surgery for MUI is less likely to be successful than surgery for stress urinary incontinence alone.StrongInform women with MUI that one single treatment may not cure urinary incontinence; it may be necessary to treat other components of the incontinence problem as well as the most bothersome symptom.Weak 