10.2. Priapism in Special Situations. 10.2.1. Stuttering (recurrent or intermittent) priapism Stuttering priapism, also termed intermittent or recurrent priapism, is a distinct condition that is characterised by repetitive and painful episodes of prolonged erections. Erections are self-limiting with intervening periods of detumescence [1395,1437]. These are analogous to repeated episodes of ischaemic priapism. In stuttering priapism the duration of the erections is generally shorter than in ischaemic priapism [1370]. The frequency and/or duration of these episodes are variable and a single episode can sometimes progress into prolonged ischaemic priapism. Robust epidemiological studies of stuttering priapism are lacking [1438,1439]. However, recurrent priapism episodes are common in men with SCD (42-64%) [1440,1441] while in adolescents and young men the incidence of priapism is 35%, of whom 72% have a history of stuttering priapism [1438]. The aetiology of stuttering priapism is similar to that of ischaemic priapism. Whilst SCD is the most common cause, idiopathic cases and cases due to a neurological disorder have been reported. Men who have acute ischaemic priapism, especially which has been prolonged (for more than four hours) are at risk of developing stuttering priapism [1435]. Several studies have proposed alternative mechanisms for stuttering priapism including inflammation, cellular adhesion, NO metabolism, vascular reactivity and coagulation [1336,1352,1395,1437,1442-1445]. Although debated, androgens have also been observed to have an association with priapism [1446]. Therefore, one of the options for the treatment of stuttering priapism is to reduce serum testosterone levels to hypogonadal levels, which then suppresses androgen-associated mechanisms believed to be involved in triggering recurrent priapism. 10.2.1.1. Diagnostic evaluation History, physical examination, laboratory testing and penile imaging follow the same principals as ischaemic priapism. In stuttering priapism there is a history of recurrent episodes of prolonged erections. These episodes can occur from several daily to isolated incidents every few months, continuously or followed by incident-free periods, of unknown duration, even months and years [1447]. The onset of the priapic episodes usually occurs during sleep and detumescence does not occur upon waking. These episodes can be painful and may be the reason that the patient first seeks medical attention. Erections are painful and the penis is rigid as in ischaemic priapism, but the duration of events is usually shorter. Between erections the penis is usually normal, but in some cases signs of fibrosis can be found. Rarely, the penis may become enlarged, a condition known as megalo-phallus. Recommendations for the diagnosis of stuttering priapism are the same as those described in section 10.1.2.5 10.2.1.2. Disease management The primary goal in the management of patients with stuttering priapism is the prevention of further episodes and limiting the chances of developing a prolonged ischaemic priapism that is refractory to conventional treatment options. In most cases, stuttering priapism can be managed by pharmacological treatment. The management of each acute episode is similar to that for ischaemic priapism; aspiration/irrigation in combination with intracavernous injections of α-adrenergic agonists. 10.2.1.2.1.α-Adrenergic agonists Studies of oral α-adrenergic agonists have suggested some prophylactic benefit for daily treatment with these agents [1448]. Adverse effects include tachycardia and palpitations. Pseudoephedrine is widely used as an oral decongestant and can be a first-line treatment option for stuttering priapism [1390]. However, its effect on corporal smooth muscle is not fully understood. Etilephrine has been used successfully to prevent stuttering priapism caused by SCD. It is usually taken orally at doses of 5-10 mg daily, with response rates of up to 72% [1449-1451]. In a placebo-controlled RCT comparing medical prophylaxis with etilephrine and ephedrine, there was no difference in efficacy between the two drugs [1451]. 10.2.1.2.2. Hormonal manipulations of circulating testosterone The aim of hormonal manipulation is to down-regulate circulating testosterone levels to suppress the action of androgens on penile erection [1351,1395,1452]. This can be achieved by GnRH agonists or antagonists, antiandrogens or oestrogens [1453,1454]. Potential adverse effects may include hot flushes, gynaecomastia, ED, loss of libido, and asthenia. All approaches have a similar efficacy profile while the potential cardiovascular toxicity of oestrogens limits their clinical use. Alternative endocrine approaches that have been used with some success include 5-α-reductase inhibitors [1455,1456] and ketoconazole; an anti-fungal agent that reduces adrenal and testicular androgen production [1452,1457]. The duration of hormonal treatment for effective suppression of recurrent priapism is problematic. It is not possible to draw any conclusions on the dose, duration of treatment and the efficacy. Caution is strongly advised when prescribing hormonal treatments to pre-pubertal boys and adolescents, and specialist advice from paediatric endocrinologists should be sought. Likewise, hormonal agents have a contraceptive effect and interfere with normal sexual maturation and spermatogenesis and affect fertility. Therefore, men who are trying with their partner to conceive should be comprehensively counselled before using hormonal treatment. Moreover, sperm cryopreservation may be considered to mitigate any potential effects of anti-androgen therapy on fertility. 10.2.1.2.3. Digoxin Digoxin is a cardiac glycoside and positive inotrope that is used to treat congestive heart failure. Digoxin regulates smooth muscle tone through several different pathways leading to penile detumescence [1351,1395,1458]. The use of maintenance digoxin doses (0.25-0.5 mg/daily) in idiopathic stuttering priapism reduces the number of hospital visits and improves QoL [1395]. In a small, clinical, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, digoxin decreased sexual desire and excitement with a concomitant reduction in penile rigidity, regardless of any significant change in plasma levels of testosterone, oestrogens and LH [1458]. Adverse effects include decreased libido, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, confusion, blurred vision, headache, gynaecomastia, rash and arrhythmia. 10.2.1.2.4. Terbutaline Terbutaline has been used to prevent stuttering priapism with detumescence rates of 36% in patients with alprostadil-induced priapism [1390]. The only RCT (n = 68) in patients with pharmacologically-induced priapism, demonstrated detumescence in 42% of the terbutaline-treated group compared to only 15% in the placebo-treated group [1391]. Adverse effects include nervousness, shakiness, drowsiness, palpitations, headache, dizziness, hot flushes, nausea and weakness. 10.2.1.2.5. Gabapentin Gabapentin has anticonvulsant, antinociceptive and anxiolytic properties and is widely used as an analgesic and anti-epileptic agent. Its proposed mechanism of action is to inhibit voltage-gated calcium channels, which attenuates synaptic transmission [1452], and reduces testosterone and FSH levels [1459]. It is given at a dose of 400 mg, four times daily, up to 2,400 mg daily, until complete penile detumescence occurs, with subsequent maintenance administration of 300 mg/daily [1460]. Adverse effects include anorgasmia and impaired erectile function. 10.2.1.2.6. Baclofen Baclofen is a gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) derivative that acts as a muscle relaxant and anti-muscle spasm agent. It can inhibit penile erection and ejaculation through GABA activity and prevents recurrent reflexogenic erections or prolonged erections from neurological diseases [1351]. Oral baclofen has little efficacy and it is not usually used in stuttering priapism but intrathecal administration is more effective [1395,1461-1463]. Adverse effects include drowsiness, confusion, dizziness, weakness, fatigue, headache, hypotension and nausea. 10.2.1.2.7. Hydroxyurea Hydroxyurea blocks the synthesis of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) by inhibiting ribonucleotide reductase, which has the effect of arresting cells in the S-phase [1452,1464]. Hydroxyurea is an established treatment for ameliorating SCD and improving life expectancy [1394,1465]. For patients with recurrent priapism, there is limited evidence to suggest a prophylactic role of hydroxyurea [1452,1464,1466]. Adverse effects include oligo-zoospermia and leg ulcers. 10.2.1.2.8. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors Low doses of PDE5Is have a paradoxical effect in alleviating and preventing stuttering priapism; mainly in patients with idiopathic and SCD-associated priapism [1351,1395,1443,1467-1471]. It is important to remember that therapy should be started when the penis is in its flaccid state and not during an acute episode. There is a delay of one week before treatment is effective. There are no reported impairments in male sexual function. 10.2.1.2.9. Intracavernosal injections Some patients with stuttering priapism, who have started on systemic treatment to prevent recurrence of unwanted erections, may not see therapeutic benefits immediately and temporarily require intracavernous self-injections at home with sympathomimetic agents [1351,1395]. The most commonly used drugs are phenylephrine and etilephrine [1336,1370,1439,1450]. Tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) is a secreted serine protease that converts the pro-enzyme plasminogen to plasmin, which acts as a fibrinolytic enzyme. Limited clinical data have suggested that a single intracavernous injection of TPA can successfully treat patients with recalcitrant priapism [1452,1472]. Mild bleeding is the most commonly observed adverse effect. 10.2.1.2.10. Penile prosthesis Patients with medically refractory stuttering priapism require frequent visits to the emergency department and are always at risk of a major ischaemic episode, which can be mitigated with insertion of a penile prosthesis [1408,1429,1473]. Nevertheless, penile prosthesis for preventing stuttering priapism should not be offered before medical treatment and a penile prosthesis should be performed only in carefully selected patients as a last resort [1408]. In patients with permanent ED due to stuttering priapism, medical treatments for ED should be used cautiously because of the risk of inducing an ischaemic episode and a penile prosthesis can be considered [1408,1474]. 10.2.1.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for treatment of stuttering priapism Summary of evidenceLEThe primary goal in the management of patients with stuttering priapism is prevention of future episodes, which can generally be achieved pharmacologically.2bHormonal therapy with GnRH agonists or antagonists or antiandrogens is able to reduce the risk of recurrent priapism episodes although it is associated with adverse events (hot flushes, gynaecomastia, ED, loss of libido, asthenia and infertility)3Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors have a paradoxical effect in alleviating and preventing stuttering priapism, mainly in patients with idiopathic and sickle cell disease-associated priapism.3The evidence with other systemic drugs (digoxin, α-adrenergic agonists, baclofen, gabapentin and terbutaline, hydroxyurea) is limited.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingManage each acute episode according to the treatment recommendations for ischaemic priapism (section 10.1.4).StrongUse hormonal therapies (mainly gonadotropin-receptor hormone agonists or antagonists) and/or anti-androgens for the prevention of future episodes in patients with frequent relapses. Do not use them before sexual maturation is reached.WeakInitiate treatment with phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors only when the penis is in its flaccid state.WeakUse digoxin, α-adrenergic agonists, baclofen, gabapentin or terbutaline only in patients with frequent and uncontrolled relapses.WeakUse intracavernous self-injections of sympathomimetic drugs at home for treatment of acute episodes on an interim basis until ischaemic priapism has been alleviated.Weak 10.2.1.4. Follow-up Follow-up for stuttering priapism includes history and clinical examination to assess the efficacy of treatment in preventing or alleviating erectile events as well as assessing erectile function and penile fibrosis. 10.2.2. Priapism in children The classification of priapism in children is similar to that in adults. In addition to ischaemic, stuttering and non-ischaemic priapism, a fourth type, neonatal priapism is also described [1336]. Priapism in children is considered rare as no data on its prevalence exist. Sickle cell disease is the major cause of priapism in children, followed by leukaemia (10%), trauma (10%), idiopathic causes (19%) and drugs (5%) [1475]. One study showed that 25% of children experienced SCD-related priapism in a pre-pubertal period [1476]. Another study revealed that 90% of men with SCD had their first priapism episode before age 20 years [1441]. Priapism in children should be evaluated and treated in a timely manner, as untreated ischaemic priapism may lead to ED and psychosexual disorders in adulthood [1477]. A multi-disciplinary team approach should be utilised with specialist input from haematologists and paediatric endocrinologists. 