10.3. Non-ischaemic (high-flow or arterial) priapism. Non-ischaemic priapism is a persistent erection caused by unregulated cavernous arterial inflow [1336]. According to aetiology, non-ischaemic priapism can be categorised into four types: traumatic, neurogenic, iatrogenic and idiopathic in origin. 10.3.1. Epidemiology/aetiology/pathophysiology Epidemiological data on non-ischaemic priapism are almost exclusively derived from small case series [1336,1364,1478-1480]. Non-ischaemic priapism is significantly less common than the ischaemic type, comprising only 5% of all priapism cases [1336]. The most frequent cause of non-ischaemic priapism is blunt perineal or penile trauma [1481]. The injury results in a laceration in the cavernosal artery or branches, leading to a fistula between the artery and the lacunar spaces of the sinusoidal space [1480]. The resultant increased blood flow results in a persistent and prolonged erection [1482]. There is often a delay between the trauma and the development of the priapism that may be up to two to three weeks [1483]. This is suggested to reflect either spasm or ischaemic necrosis of the injured artery, with the fistula only developing as the spasm resolves or when the ischaemic segment “blows up”. The priapism typically occurs after a nocturnal erection or an erection related to sexual activity, resulting in the sudden increase of blood flow and pressure in the cavernous arteries [1484]. The patient typically reports an erection that is not fully rigid and is not associated with pain because the venous drainage is not compromised and the penile tissue does not become ischaemic [1485]. Non-ischaemic priapism can occur after acute spinal cord injury, presumably due to loss of sympathetic input, leading to predominant parasympathetic input and increased arterial flow [1486]. It has also been reported to occur following internal urethrotomy [1487], Nesbit procedure [1488], circumcision [1489], transrectal prostate biopsy [1490], and brachytherapy for prostate cancer [1491]. Some cases have also been described following shunting procedures performed for ischaemic priapism due to a lacerated cavernosal artery (conversion of low-flow to high-flow priapism) [1492-1494]. Although SCD is usually associated with ischaemic priapism, occasional cases of high-flow priapism have been reported; however, the pathophysiological mechanism remains unclear [1495]. Finally, metastatic malignancy to the penis can also rarely cause non-ischaemic priapism [1496,1497]. 10.3.2. Diagnostic evaluation 10.3.2.1. History A comprehensive history is mandatory in non-ischaemic priapism diagnosis and follows the same principles as described in section 10.1.2.1. Arterial priapism should be suspected when the patient reports a history of pelvic, perineal, or genital trauma; no penile pain (discomfort is possible); and a persistent, not fully rigid erection. The corpus cavernosum can become fully rigid with sexual stimulation, so sexual intercourse is usually not compromised. The onset of post-traumatic non-ischaemic priapism can be delayed by several hours to weeks following the initial injury [1336]. 10.3.2.2. Physical examination In non-ischaemic priapism, the corpora are tumescent but not fully rigid. Abdominal, penile and perineal examination may reveal evidence of trauma [1336]. Neurological examination is indicated if a neurogenic aetiology is suspected. 10.3.2.3. Laboratory testing Laboratory testing should include a blood count with white blood cell differential and a coagulation profile to assess for anaemia and other haematological abnormalities. Blood aspiration from the corpus cavernosum shows bright red arterial blood in arterial priapism, while blood is dark in ischaemic priapism. Blood gas analysis is essential to differentiate between non-ischaemic and ischaemic priapism. Blood gas values in high-flow priapism show normal arterial blood [1336] (Table 37). 10.3.2.4. Penile imaging Colour duplex US of the penis and perineum is recommended and can differentiate non-ischaemic from ischaemic priapism [1362-1364]. Ultrasound must be performed without intracavernosal vasoactive drug injection [1498]. In non-ischaemic priapism, US helps to localise the fistula site and appears as a characteristic colour blush and turbulent high-velocity flow on Doppler analysis [1499]. Patients with non-ischaemic priapism have normal to high blood velocities in the cavernous arteries [1365,1500]. Selective pudendal arteriography can reveal a characteristic blush at the site of injury in arterial priapism [1501,1502]. However, due to its invasiveness, it should be reserved for the management of non-ischaemic priapism when embolisation is being considered [1336,1359]. The role of MRI in the diagnostic evaluation of priapism is controversial. Its role in non-ischaemic priapism is limited because the small penile vessels and fistulae cannot be easily demonstrated [1503]. 10.3.2.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnosis of non-ischaemic priapism Summary of evidenceLENon-ischemic priapism is less common than ischemic and is usually associated with blunt perineal or penile trauma leading to the development of intracavernosal fistula2bMedical history and blood gas analysis are able to differentiate between ischemic and non-ischemic priapism2bBlood aspiration from the corpora in case of non-ischemic priapism reveal bright red arterial blood with normal arterial gas values2bPenile duplex US is able to identify intracavernosal fistula responsible for non-ischemic priapism2b RecommendationsStrength ratingTake a comprehensive history to establish the diagnosis, which can help to determine the priapism subtype.StrongInclude a physical examination of the genitalia, perineum and abdomen in the diagnostic evaluation.StrongInclude a neurological examination if neurogenic non-ischaemic priapism is suspected.StrongInclude complete blood count, white blood cell differential, and coagulation profile for laboratory testing.StrongAnalyse the blood gas parameters from blood aspirated from the penis to differentiate between ischaemic and non-ischaemic priapism.StrongPerform colour duplex ultrasound of the penis and perineum to differentiate between ischaemic and non-ischaemic priapism.StrongPerform selected pudendal arteriography when embolisation is planned for non-ischaemic priapism.Strong 10.3.3. Disease management Although the conventional belief is that the management of non-ischaemic priapism is not an emergency because the corpus cavernosum does not contain ischaemic blood; however, recent data indicate that the duration of non-ischaemic priapism can also impact EF. In a case series consisting of six patients with high-flow priapism after median follow-up of 4.5 (2-12) weeks, all patients reported development of ED or distal penile flaccidity [1430]. The goal of treatment is closure of the fistula. Non-ischaemic priapism can be managed conservatively or by direct perineal compression. Failure of conservative treatment requires selective arterial embolisation [1504]. The optimal time interval between conservative treatment and arterial embolisation is under debate. Definitive management can be performed at the discretion of the treating physician and should be discussed with the patient so that they can understand the risks of treatment [1336,1359]. 10.3.3.1. Conservative management Conservative management may include applying ice to the perineum or perineal compression, which is typically US-guided. The fistula occasionally closes spontaneously. Even in cases where the fistula remains patent, intercourse is still possible [1364,1479,1505,1506]. Androgen deprivation therapy (e.g., leuprolide injections, bicalutamide and ketoconazole) has been reported in case series to enable closure of the fistula reducing spontaneous and sleep-related erections [1507]. However, sexual dysfunction due to these treatments must be considered. Patients may develop ED or distal penile flaccidity while undergoing conservative treatment [1430]. Blood aspiration is not helpful for the treatment of arterial priapism and the use of α-adrenergic antagonists is not recommended because of potential severe adverse effects (e.g., transfer of the drug into the systemic circulation). 10.3.3.2. Selective arterial embolisation Selective arterial embolisation can be performed using temporary substances, such as autologous blood clot [1508-1510] and gel foam [1509,1511], or permanent substances such as microcoils [1509,1511-1513], ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer (PVA), and N-butyl-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) [1514]. It is assumed that temporary embolisation provides a decreased risk of ED, with the disadvantage of higher failure/recurrence rates, as a consequence of artery embolisation using temporary materials. However, there is insufficient evidence to support this hypothesis. Success rates ranging between 61.7 and 83.3%, and ED rates from 0-33.3% after the first arterial embolization have been reported, suggesting that failure/recurrence may not be significantly higher with temporary embolisation materials, and preservation of erectile function may not be that different between the two modalities either [1484]. Other potential complications of arterial embolisation include penile gangrene, gluteal ischaemia, cavernositis, and perineal abscess [1336,1515]. Repeated embolisation is a reasonable option for treating non-ischaemic priapism, both in terms of efficacy and safety [1484]. 10.3.3.3. Surgical management Surgical ligation of the fistula is possible through a transcorporeal or inguinoscrotal approach, using intra-operative Doppler US. Surgery is technically challenging and associated with significant risks, particularly of ED [1516]. Surgery is rarely performed and should only be considered when there are contraindications for selective embolisation, if embolisation is unavailable, or repeated embolisations have failed. If the patient desires more definitive treatment and is not sexually active or has pre-existing ED, surgical intervention can be an appropriate option [1484]. Erectile dysfunction rates ranging from 0-50% have been reported following treatment for non-ischaemic priapism, with surgical ligation having the highest reported rates [1484]. Patients can require penile prosthesis implantation for ED in the long-term [1408]. 10.3.3.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the treatment of non-ischaemic priapism Summary of evidenceLENon-ischaemic priapism can cause erectile dysfunction over time and early definitive management should be undertaken.3Conservative management applying ice to the perineum or site-specific perineal compression is an option in all cases. The use of androgen deprivation therapy may enable closure of the fistula reducing spontaneous and sleep-related erections.3Selective artery embolisation, using temporary or permanent substances, has high success rates. No definitive statement can be made on the best substance for embolisation in terms of sexual function preservation and success rate.3Repeated embolisation is a reasonable option for the treatment of non-ischaemic priapism.2bSelective surgical ligation of the fistula is associated with high risk of erectile dysfunction.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform definitive management for non-ischaemic priapism at the discretion of the treating physician as it is not a medical emergency.WeakManage non-ischaemic priapism conservatively with the use of site-specific perineal compression as the first step. Consider androgen deprivation therapy only in adults.WeakPerform selective arterial embolisation when conservative management has failed.StrongPerform the first selective arterial embolisation using temporary material.WeakRepeat selective arterial embolisation with temporary or permanent material for recurrent non-ischaemic priapism following selective arterial embolisation.WeakReserve selective surgical ligation of a fistula as a final treatment option when repeated arterial embolisations have failed.Weak 10.3.3.5. High-flow priapism in children Non-ischaemic priapism is a rare condition, especially in children. The embarrassment that children may have in speaking about it to their parents can lead to misdiagnosis and underestimating the prevalence of this condition [1517]. The aetiology, clinical presentation, diagnostic and therapeutic principles are comparable with those of arterial priapism in adults. However, some differentiating features should be noted. Idiopathic non-ischaemic priapism can be found in a significant percentage of children [1518]. Perineal compression with the thumb may be a useful manoeuvre to distinguish ischaemic and non-ischaemic priapism, particularly in children, where it may result in immediate detumescence, followed by the return of the erection with the removal of compression [1484]. Conservative management using ice applied to the perineum or site-specific perineal compression may be successful, particularly in children [1519,1520]. Although reportedly successful, embolisation in children is technically challenging and requires treatment within a specialist paediatric vascular radiology department [1374,1521]. 10.3.3.6. Follow-up During conservative management of non-ischaemic priapism, physical examination and colour duplex US can be useful tools to assess treatment efficacy. Close follow-up using colour duplex US and MRI can help detect distal penile fibrosis and be beneficial in clinical decision-making to intervene with embolisation earlier [1430]. Follow-up after selective arterial embolisation should include clinical examination, colour duplex US, and erectile function assessment. If in doubt, repeat arteriography is required. The goals are to determine if the treatment was successful, identify signs of recurrence, and verify any anatomical and functional sequelae [1498].  