3.15.3. Disease management. There are two main treatment approaches: conservative (non-surgical and surgical). 3.15.3.1. Non-surgical therapy The objective of conservative therapy is prevention of febrile UTI. It is based on the understanding that: Vesicoureteric reflux can resolve spontaneously, mostly in young patients with low-grade reflux. Renal scarring is also a significant risk factor for breakthrough UTI and could be used to determine those at risk of symptomatic VUR persistence [981];Resolution is nearly 80% in VUR grades I and II and 30-50% in VUR grades III-V within four to five years of follow-up;Spontaneous resolution is low for bilateral high-grade reflux [982];Vesicoureteric reflux is very unlikely to damage the kidney postnatally when patients are free of infection and have normal LUT function;There is no evidence that small scars even bilateral can cause hypertension, renal insufficiency or problems during pregnancy. Indeed, these are possible only in cases of severe bilateral renal damage;The conservative approach includes watchful waiting, intermittent or continuous antibiotic prophylaxis, and bladder and bowel rehabilitation in those with LUTD [704,979,983-985];Circumcision during early infancy may be considered as part of the conservative approach as it is effective in reducing the risk of infection in normal children [986]. 3.15.3.1.1. Follow-up Regular follow-up with imaging studies (e.g. VCUG, nuclear cystography, or DMSA scan) is part of the conservative management to monitor spontaneous resolution and kidney status. Vesicoureteral reflux increases the risk of febrile UTI and renal scarring especially when in combination with LUTD. Constipation in VUR patients with UTI is common and the prevelence can reach 27%. Assessment and management of all toilet trained children presenting with UTI should be a part of conservative follow-up [980]. During the conservative management of high-grade infant reflux, spontaneous downgrading and resolution of VUR is more likely. However this also depends on gender, breakthrough UTI, renal damage type and bladder dysfunction. Practical scoring systems for making decisions on further treatment, surveillance, prophylaxis or surgical intervention exist [987]. Conservative management should be dismissed in all cases of febrile breakthrough infections, despite prophylaxis, and intervention should be considered. 3.15.3.1.2. Continuous antibiotic prophylaxis Many prospective studies have evaluated the role of continuous antibiotic prophylaxis in the prevention of recurrent UTI and renal scarring. It is clear that antibiotic prophylaxis may not be needed in every reflux patient [988-990]. Trials show the benefit of CAP is none or minimal in low-grade reflux. Continuous antibiotic prophylaxis is useful in patients with grade III and IV reflux in preventing recurrent infections but its use in preventing further renal damage is not proven. For VUR children receiving CAP, younger age at the initial diagnosis of UTI (≤ 12 months), bilateral VUR, and BBD are independent risk factors for the occurrence of break through UTIs [991]. Toilet-trained children and children with LUTD derive better benefit from CAP [990,992-996]. The RIVUR trial was the largest, randomised, placebo-controlled, double blind, multi-centre study, involving 607 children aged 2-72 months with grade I-IV VUR. The RIVUR study showed that prophylaxis reduced the risk of recurrent UTI by 50% but not renal scarring and its consequences (hypertension and renal failure), at the cost of increased antimicrobial resistance. The benefit of prophylaxis was insignificant in patients with grade III or IV VUR and in the absence of LUTD [997-1000]. Additional review of the RIVUR data based on a risk classification system defines a high-risk group (uncircumcised males; presence of BBD and high grade reflux) who would benefit from a antibiotic prophylaxis significantly. In the context of management with CAP in VUR patients, this should be viewed as a spectrum and a shift from ‘absolute’ CAP in dilated VUR towards a ‘selective’ risk-based approach and should be supported [1001]. It may be difficult and risky to select patients who do not need CAP. A safe approach would be to use CAP in most cases. Decision-making may be influenced by the presence of risk factors for UTI, such as young age, high-grade VUR, status of toilet-training/LUTS, female sex, and circumcision status. Although the literature does not provide any reliable information about the duration of CAP in reflux patients, a practical approach would be to use CAP until after children have been toilet-trained and ensuring that there is no LUTD. The literature generaly consists of prescribing daily antibiotics at one quarter to one half the regular therapeutic dose. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, amoxicilin and nitrofurantoin are the most commonly used CAP agents. A child with a UTI and significant VUR can still be recommended to be treated conservatively at first, with surgical care reserved for incompliance for CAP, breakthrough UTIs under CAP and significant VUR that persists of long-term follow-up [991,1002]. Determination of optimal timing to discontinue CAP is controversial however patients administered CAP for less than a year after the last febrile UTI and those with bilateral VUR are likely to have more frequent recurrence. Administration of CAP more than one year after the last febrile UTI can potentially be beneficial to avoid recurrent UTIs [1003]. Active surveillance of UTI is needed after CAP is discontinued. The follow-up scheme and the decision to perform an anti-reflux procedure or discontinuation of CAP should be tailored for each VUR case together with the patient and caregivers. It is strongly advised that the advantages and disadvantages should be discussed in detail and easy/early access to healthcare during febrile UTIs should be taken into consideration. One of the biggest concerns of CAP for patients, caregivers and physicians is the long-term effects of CAP. As a secondary outcome of the RIVUR study, TMP-SMZ prophylaxis for two years did not reveal any adverse effect on complete blood count (CBC), serum electrolytes and creatinine and such routine laboratory tests in otherwise healthy children is not mandatory [1004]. Impact of long-term CAP on gut microbiota in children with VUR is contraversial and requires more research [1005,1006]. Continuous antibiotic prophylaxis, for prevention of UTIs in symptomatic VUR, which diagnosed during the work-up of antenatal hydronephrosis, is recommended in the first year of life. However, the current literature remains unclear whether infants diagnosed with asypmtomatic VUR during the antenatal hydronephrosis work-up will also benefit from CAP [1007]. RecommendationsStrength ratingInitially treat all symptomatic patients diagnosed within the first year of life with continuous antibiotic prophylaxis, regardless of the grade of reflux or presence of renal scars.WeakOffer immediate, parenteral antibiotic treatment for febrile breakthrough infections.StrongInitially manage all children presenting at age one to five years conservatively.StrongOffer close surveillance without antibiotic prophylaxis to children presenting with lower grades of reflux and without symptoms.StrongEnsure that a detailed investigation for the presence of lower urinary tract dysfunction (LUTD) is done in all and especially in children after toilet-training. If LUTD is found, the initial treatment should always be for LUTD.Strong 3.15.3.2. Surgical treatment Surgical treatment can be carried out by endoscopic injection of bulking agents or ureteral re-implantation. 3.15.3.2.1. Subureteric injection of bulking materials With the availability of biodegradable substances, endoscopic subureteric injection of bulking agents has become an alternative to long-term antibiotic prophylaxis and open surgical intervention in the treatment of VUR in children. Using cystoscopy, a bulking material is injected beneath the intramural part of the ureter in a submucosal location. The injected bulking agent elevates the ureteral orifice and supports the distal ureter, lengthens the submuscosal tunnel so that coaptation is increased. This results in narrowing of the lumen, which prevents reflux of urine into the ureter, while still allowing its antegrade flow. Reflux timing during VCUG can be used to predict the success rate of endoscopic treatment, since reflux occuring only during the voiding phase has a higher success than filling phase VUR [1008]. Several bulking agents have been used over the past two decades, including polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE or Teflon™), collagen, autologous fat, polydimethylsiloxane, silicone, chondrocytes, a solution of dextranomer/hyaluronic acid (D/HA) (Deflux™, Dexell®) and more recently polyacrylatepolyalcohol copolymer hydrogel (PPC) (Vantris®) [1009,1010]. Although the best results have been obtained with PTFE [1011], due to concerns about particle migration, PTFE has not been approved for use in children [1012]. Although they are all biocompatible, other compounds such as collagen and chondrocytes have failed to provide a good outcome. Deflux™ was approved by the USA FDA in 2001 for the treatment of VUR in children. Injection can be performed under the ureteric orifice to create a volcanic appearance or by using a hydrodistension technique to the ureteric orifice followed by injection to the intramural ureter. In a meta-analysis [1013] of 5,527 patients and 8,101 renal units, the reflux resolution rate (by ureter) following one treatment for grades I and II reflux was 78.5%, 72% for grade III, 63% for grade IV, and 51% for grade V. If the first injection was unsuccessful, the second treatment had a success rate of 68% and the third treatment 34%. The aggregate success rate with one or more injections was 85%. The success rate was significantly lower for duplicated (50%) vs. single (73%) systems, and neuropathic (62%) vs. normal (74%) bladders. The required injection volume of PPC and D/HA to achieve the same success rate can differ between agents and is generally less for PPC [1014,1015]. Ureteral diameter ratio is a relatively recent objective measurement and appears to be a new predictive tool for clinical outcome and success after endoscopic injection of VUR [1016]. Obstruction at UVJ (UVJO) may happen in the long term follow-up after endoscopic correction of reflux. Patients with high-grade reflux and dilated ureters are at risk of late obstruction. Although in the short term (3-6 months) follow-up success rates and UVJ obstruction seems to be comparable in the long run, it is significantly more common when polyacrylate-polyalcohol copolymer is used as bulking substance [1017-1020]. The ureteral reimplantation following a failed endoscopic surgery is more challenging after PPC and distal ureter can not be preserved and requires excision due to fibrosis [1015]. Although ureteral fibrosis or inflamatory changes following Vantris injection causing UVJO has been shown to be similar to other injection materials, still PPC demonstrates a higher obstruction rate [1021]. Clinical validation of the effectiveness of anti-reflux endoscopy is currently hampered by the lack of methodologically appropriate studies. In the most recent prospective, randomised trials comparing three treatment arms: i) endoscopic injection; ii) antibiotic prophylaxis; iii) surveillance without antibiotic prophylaxis in 203 children aged one to two years with grade III/IV reflux, endoscopic treatment gave the highest resolution rate of 71% compared to 39% and 47% for treatment arms ii and iii, respectively, after two years’ follow-up. The recurrence rate at two years after endoscopic treatment was 20%. The occurrence of febrile UTIs and scar formation was highest in the surveillance group at 57% and 11%, respectively. New scar formation rate was higher with endoscopic injection (7%) compared with antibiotic prophylaxis (0%) [1022]. Longer follow-up studies are needed to validate these findings. High grade VUR in infants can be treated with injection therapy and the resolution rate is higher than that of prophylaxis. However, this can not be recommended for all high grade infants with VUR since not only all are symptomatic and but also resolution or downgrading can be achieved at favourable conditions such as unilaterality, grade IV and low residual urine [1023,1024]. 3.15.3.2.2. Open surgical techniques Various intra- and extravesical techniques have been described for the surgical correction of reflux. Although different methods have specific advantages and complications, they all share the basic principle of lengthening the intramural part of the ureter by submucosal embedding of the ureter. All techniques have been shown to be safe with a low rate of complications and excellent success rates (92-98%) [1025]. The most popular and reliable open procedure is cross trigonal re-implantation described by Cohen [1019]. The main concern with this procedure is the difficulty of accessing the ureters endoscopically, if needed, when the child is older. Alternatives are suprahiatal re-implantation (Politano-Leadbetter technique) and infrahiatal re-implantation (Glenn-Anderson technique). If an extravesical procedure (Lich-Gregoir) is planned, cystoscopy should be performed pre-operatively to assess the bladder mucosa and the position and configuration of the ureteric orifices. In bilateral reflux, an intravesical anti-reflux procedure may be considered, because simultaneous bilateral extravesical reflux repair carries an increased risk of temporary post-operative urine retention [1026]. Overall, all surgical procedures offer very high and similar success rates for correcting VUR. 3.15.3.2.3. Laparoscopy and robot-assisted There have been a considerable number of case series of transperitoneal, extravesical and pneumovesicoscopic intravesical ureteral re-implantation, which have shown the feasibility of the techniques. A recent systemic review and meta-analysis comparing laparoscopic extravesical (LEVUR) vs. transvesicoscopic ureteral reimplantation (TVUR), revealed both to be good alternatives in terms of success and complication rates. Laparoscopic extravesical ureteral reimplantation is generally biasly preferred for unilateral low grade cases and therefore appears to have a higher success and shorter hospital stay [1020]. Various anti-reflux surgeries have been performed with the robot and the extravesical approach is the most commonly used. Although initial reports give comparable outcomes to their open surgical counterparts in terms of successful resolution of reflux, recent meta-analysis of results of Robotic-Assisted Laparoscopic Ureteral Reimplantation (RALUR) are within a wide range of variation and on average they are poor compared to open surgery. Operative times, costs and post-operative complications leading to secondary interventions are higher with RALUR but post-operative pain and hospital stay is less compared to open surgery [1027-1030]. In addition, laparoscopic- or robotic-assisted approaches are more invasive than endoscopic correction and their advantages over open surgery are still debated. Therefore, at present, a laparoscopic approach cannot be recommended as a routine procedure. It can be offered as an alternative to the caregivers in centres where there is established experience [986,1031-1039]. Older children with complex anatomy and/or following a failed injection or open reimplant, can specifically benefit from RALUR since the robotic approach can facilitate the exposure. RALUR can be performed uni or bilateral, although caution is advised in bilateral cases due to the risk of transient retention [1028]. De novo hydronephrosis up to 30% can occur after extravesical RALUR and behave similarly to open ureteral reimplantation which is self resolving in the overwhelming majority of cases [1040]. 