3.15.2. Diagnostic evaluation. The diagnostic work-up should aim to evaluate the overall health and development of the child, the presence of UTIs, renal status, the presence of VUR, and LUT function. A basic diagnostic work-up comprises a detailed medical history (including family history, and screening for LUTD), physical examination including blood pressure measurement, urinalysis (assessing proteinuria), urine culture, and serum creatinine in patients with bilateral renal parenchymal abnormalities. The standard imaging tests include renal and bladder US, VCUG and nuclear renal scans. Ultrasound and VCUG could be considered as complementary techniques [949]. The criterion standard in diagnosis of VUR is VCUG, especially at the initial work-up. This test provides precise anatomical detail and allows grading of VUR [950]. In 1985, the International Reflux Study Committee introduced a uniform system for the classification of VUR [951,952] (Table 2). The grading system combines two earlier classifications and is based upon the extent of retrograde filling and dilatation of the ureter, renal pelvis and calyces on VCUG [952]. Radionuclide studies for detection of reflux have lower radiation exposure than VCUG, but the anatomical details depicted are inferior [953]. Recent studies on alternative imaging modalities for detection on VUR have yielded good results with voiding US and magnetic resonance VCUG [954-957]. Contrast enhanced voiding urosonography (ceVUS) with intravesical instillation of different ultrasound contrast agents has been shown to be highly sensitive giving comparable results with conventional VCUG while avoiding exposure to ionising radiation [510,958-960]. However, despite the concerns about ionising radiation and its invasive nature, conventional VCUG still remains the gold standard because it allows better determination of the grade of VUR (in a single or duplicated kidney) and assessment of the bladder and urethral configuration. Intrarenal reflux (IRR) is associated with renal scarring development and it can be diagnosed on the images acquired during the voiding phase of the standard 4-staged VCUG and on ceVUS [961,962]. Table 2: Grading system for VUR on VCUG, according to the International Reflux Study Committee [963] Grade IReflux does not reach the renal pelvis; varying degrees of ureteral dilatationGrade IIReflux reaches the renal pelvis; no dilatation of the collecting system; normal fornicesGrade IIIMild or moderate dilatation of the ureter, with or without kinking; moderate dilatation of the collecting system; normal or minimally deformed fornicesGrade IVModerate dilatation of the ureter with or without kinking; moderate dilatation of the collecting system; blunt fornices, but impressions of the papillae still visibleGrade VGross dilatation and kinking of the ureter, marked dilatation of the collecting system; papillary impressions no longer visible; intraparenchymal reflux Dimercaptosuccinic acid is the best nuclear agent for visualising the cortical tissue and differential function between both kidneys. Dimercaptosuccinic acid is taken up by proximal renal tubular cells and is a good indicator of renal parenchyma function. In areas of acute inflammation or scarring, DMSA uptake is poor and appears as cold spots. Dimercaptosuccinic acid scans are therefore used to detect and monitor renal scarring. A baseline DMSA scan at the time of diagnosis can be used for comparison with successive scans later during follow-up [964]. Dimercaptosuccinic acid can also be used as a diagnostic tool during suspected episodes of acute pyelonephritis [965]. Children with a normal DMSA scan during acute UTI have a low-risk of renal damage [965,966]. Video-urodynamic studies are only important in patients in whom secondary reflux is suspected, such as those with spina bifida or boys in whom VCUG is suggestive of PUV. In the case of LUTS, diagnosis and follow-up can be limited to non-invasive tests (e.g. voiding charts, US, or uroflowmetry) [929]. Cystoscopy has a limited role in evaluating reflux, except for infravesical obstruction or ureteral anomalies that might influence therapy. 3.15.2.1. Recommendations for diagnosis of VUR RecommendationsStrength ratingFor diagnosis of VUR apart from VCUG , ceVUS is another option.Weak 3.15.2.2. Infants presenting with prenatally diagnosed hydronephrosis Ultrasound of the kidney and bladder is the first standard evaluation tool for children with prenatally diagnosed hydronephrosis. It is non-invasive and provides reliable information regarding kidney structure, size, parenchymal thickness and collecting system dilatation [967,968]. Ultrasound should be delayed until the first week after birth because of early oliguria in the neonate. It is essential to evaluate the bladder, as well as the kidneys. The degree of dilatation in the collecting system under US, when the bladder is both full and empty, may provide significant information about the presence of VUR. Bladder wall thickness and configuration may be an indirect sign of LUTD and reflux. The absence of hydronephrosis on postnatal US excludes the presence of significant obstruction; however, it does not exclude VUR. Monitoring with careful US avoids unnecessary invasive and irradiating examinations. The first two US scans within the first one to two months of life are highly accurate for defining the presence or absence of renal pathology. In infants with two normal, successive scans, VUR is rare, and if present it is likely to be low-grade [941,969]. The degree of hydronephrosis is not a reliable indicator for the presence of VUR, even though cortical abnormalities are more common in high-grade hydronephrosis [922]. The presence of cortical abnormalities on US (defined as cortical thinning and irregularity, as well as increased echogenicity) warrants the use of VCUG for detecting VUR [922]. Dimercaptosuccinic acid provides more reliable and quantitative measurement of the degree of cortical abnormalities, first detected with US. The use of VCUG is recommended in patients with US findings of bilateral high-grade hydronephrosis, duplex kidneys with hydronephrosis, ureterocele, ureteric dilatation, and abnormal bladders, because the likelihood of VUR is much higher. In all other conditions, the use of VCUG to detect reflux is optional [922,943,970-972]. When infants who are diagnosed with prenatal hydronephrosis become symptomatic with UTIs, further evaluation with VCUG should be considered [971]. Patients with severe hydronephrosis and those whose hydronephrosis is sustained or progressive, need further evaluation to exclude obstruction. 3.15.2.3. Siblings and offspring of reflux patients The screening of asymptomatic siblings and offspring is controversial. Some authors think that early identification of children with VUR may prevent episodes of UTI and therefore renal scarring, whereas others think that screening asymptomatic individuals is likely to result in significant over-treatment of clinically insignificant VUR. In screened populations the prevalence of VUR is 27.4% in siblings and 35.7% in offspring [963]. The overall estimate for renal cortical abnormalities is 19.3% (11-54%), with 27.8% having renal damage in cohorts of symptomatic and asymptomatic children combined. In asymptomatic siblings only, the rate of renal damage is 14.4% (0-100%). Although early screening and therefore early diagnosis and treatment appears to be more effective than late screening in preventing further renal damage [922,924,973,974], screening in all siblings and offspring cannot be recommended based on the available evidence. The lack of RCTs for screened patients to assess clinical health outcomes makes evidence-based guideline recommendations difficult. 3.15.2.4. Recommendations for paediatric screening of VUR RecommendationsStrength ratingInform parents of children with vesicoureteric reflux (VUR) that siblings and offspring have a high prevalence of VUR.Strong 3.15.2.5. Children with febrile urinary tract infections A routine recommendation of VCUG at zero to two years of age after the first proven febrile UTI is the safest approach as the evidence for the criteria to selecting patients for reflux detection is weak. Upon diagnosing a child with the first febrile UTI, the risk factors: age (> 6 months), presence of sepsis, WBC count (≥ 15 000/mm), and abnormal renal US results, can be used for the generation of a predictive score for VUR presence [975]. (See Section 3.9 on urinary tract infections in children). Children with febrile infections and abnormal renal US findings may have higher risk of developing renal scars and they should all be evaluated for reflux [513]. If reflux is diagnosed, further evaluation has traditionally consisted of a DMSA scan. An alternative “top-down” approach is also an option, as suggested by several studies in the literature. This approach carries out an initial DMSA scan close to the time of a febrile UTI, to determine the presence of pyelonephritis, which is then followed by VCUG if the DMSA scan reveals kidney involvement. A normal DMSA scan with no subsequent VCUG will fail to identify VUR in 5-27% of cases, with the missed VUR presumably being less significant. In contrast, a normal DMSA scan with no VCUG avoids unnecessary VCUG in > 50% of those screened [503,976-978]. 3.15.2.6. Children with lower urinary tract symptoms and vesicoureteric reflux Detection of LUTD is essential in treating children with VUR. It is suggested that reflux with LUTD resolves faster after LUTD correction, and that patients with LUTD are at higher risk for developing UTI and renal scarring [928,979]. The co-existence of both conditions should be explored in any patient who has VUR. If there are symptoms suggestive of LUTD (e.g. urgency, wetting, constipation or holding manoeuvres), an extensive history and examination, including voiding charts, uroflowmetry and residual urine determination, will reliably diagnose underlying LUTD. Among toilet-trained children, those with both LUTD and VUR are at higher risk of developing recurrent UTIs than children with isolated VUR [540]. Bladder and bowel dysfunction is common in toilet-trained children presenting with UTI with or without primary VUR. A subgroup meta-analysis also shows that functional constipation is common in these children, with almost every third child affected by it. It was also found that the presence of both BBD and VUR doubles the risk of recurrence of UTI; hence, all children presenting with UTI should be carefully evaluated for presence of BBD and managed accordingly [980]. In LUTD, VUR is often low-grade and US findings are normal, and there is no indication for performing VCUG in all children with LUTD, but the presence of febrile infections should be meticulously investigated. The co-existence of LUTD and VUR means it would be better to do a test covering both conditions, such as a VUDS. Any patient with LUTD and a history of febrile UTI should be investigated with a VUDS, if available. Furthermore, any child who fails standard therapy for LUTD should undergo urodynamic investigation. At this stage, combining a urodynamic study with VCUG is highly recommended. 