3.13.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology. Neurogenic detrusor-sphincter dysfunction (NDSD) can develop as a result of a lesion at any level in the nervous system. This condition contributes to various forms of LUTD, which may lead to incontinence, UTIs, VUR, and ultimately to renal scarring and renal failure requiring dialysis and/or transplantation. Conservative treatment starting in the first year of life is the first choice, however, surgery may be required at a later stage to establish adequate bladder storage, continence and drainage later on [663]. The main goals of treatment concerning the urinary tract are prevention of UTI’s, urinary tract deterioration, achievement of continence at an appropriate age and promoting as good as possible QoL [4,5]. With regard to the associated bowel dysfunction, stool continence, with evacuation at a social acceptable moment, is another goal as well as education and treatment of disturbance in sexual function. Due to the increased risk of development of latex allergy, latex-free products (e.g., gloves, catheters etc.) should be used from the very beginning whenever possible [664]. Neurogenic bladder in children with myelodysplasia presents with various patterns of Detrusor-Sphincter-Dyssynergia with a wide range of severity [665]. About 12% of neonates with myelodysplasia have no signs of neuro-urological dysfunction at birth [666]. Newborns with myelodysplasia who initially have normal urodynamic studies are at risk for neurological deterioration secondary to spinal cord tethering, especially during the first six years of life. Close follow-up of these children is important for the early diagnosis and timely surgical correction of tethered spinal cord, and for the prevention of progressive urinary tract deterioration [666]. At birth, the majority of patients have normal UUTs, but up to 60% develop upper tract deterioration due to bladder changes, UTI and /or VUR, if not treated properly [667-670]. Even today in a contemporary series around 50% of the patients are incontinent and 15% have an impaired renal function at the age of 29 years [671]. A systematic review concerning the outcome of adult meningomyelocele patients demonstrated that around 37% (8-85%) are continent, 25% have some degree of renal damage and 1.3% end stage renal failure [672]. The term “continence” is used differently in the reports, and the definition of “always dry” was used in only a quarter of the reports [673]. A nationwide survey in USA showed, that less than 50% of the adult spina population reported being continent [674], which demonstrates the need for better consulting and lifelong support. The most common presentation at birth is myelodysplasia. The incidence of neural tube defects in Europe is 9.1 per 10,000 births and has not decreased in recent years, despite longstanding recommendations concerning folic acid supplementations [675]. The term myelodysplasia includes a group of developmental anomalies that result from defects in neural tube closure. Lesions include spina bifida aperta and occulta, meningocele, lipomyelomeningocele, or myelomeningocele. Myelomeningocele is by far the most common defect seen and the most detrimental. With antenatal screening spina bifida can be diagnosed before birth with the possibility of intrauterine closure of the defect [676,677]. Traumatic and neoplastic spinal lesions of the cord are less frequent in children but can also cause severe urological problems. Other congenital malformations or acquired diseases can cause a neurogenic bladder, such as total or partial sacral agenesis which can be part of the caudal regression syndrome [678]. In any child presenting with anorectal malformation (ARM) and cloacal malformations, the development of a neurogenic bladder is possible [679]. Patients with cerebral palsy may also present with varying degrees of voiding dysfunction, usually in the form of uninhibited bladder contractions (often due to spasticity of the pelvic floor and sphincter complex) and wetting. Finally, “non-neurogenic neurogenic” bladder dysfunction, such as Hinman or Ochoa syndrome, have been described, in which no neurogenic anomaly can be found, but severe bladder dysfunction as seen in neurogenic bladders is present [680,681]. 