3.13.3. Diagnostic evaluation. Today several guidelines and timetables are used [685-687]. The Panel advocate proactive management in children with spinal dysraphism. In those with a safe bladder during the first urodynamic investigation, the next urodynamic investigation can be delayed until one year of age [4]. 3.13.3.1. History and clinical evaluation History should include questions on clean intermittent catheterisation (CIC) frequency, urine leakage, bladder capacity, UTI, medication, bowel function as well as changes in neurological status. A thorough clinical evaluation is mandatory including the external genitalia and the back. A two-day diary, recording drinking volume and times as well as CIC intervals, bladder volume and leakage can provide additional information about the efficacy of the treatment. 3.13.3.2. Laboratory and urinalysis After the first week of life, plasma creatinine level should be obtained, later in life; cystatin level is more accurate [688,689]. If there is any sign of decreased renal function, physicians should be encouraged to optimize the treatment as much as possible. The criteria for urine analysis are the same as for UTI (refer to Chapter 3.10). However, it is much easier for caregivers or patients to obtain catheter urine in patients who are on CIC. They can also perform a dip stick analysis to screen for UTI at home. (For relevance see Section 3.12.4.5). Albuminuria is an early marker of renal disease also in children with neurogenic bladder [690]. 3.13.3.3. Ultrasound At birth, US of the kidneys and bladder should be performed and then repeated at least annually. If there are any clinical changes in between, another US should be performed. Dilatation of the UUT should be reported according to the classification system of the Society of Foetal Urology [691], including the measurement of caliceal dilatation and anterior posterior diameter of the renal pelvis. Residual urine and bladder wall thickness should also be noted. A dilated ureter behind the bladder should be recorded. Bladder wall thickness has been shown not to be predictive of high pressures in the bladder during voiding and storage and cannot be used as a non-invasive tool to judge the risk for the UUT [692]. 3.13.3.4. Urodynamic studies/videourodynamic Urodynamic studies (UD) are one of the most important diagnostic tools in patients with neurogenic bladders. In newborns with spina bifida aperta), the first UD should be performed after the phase of spinal shock after closure, usually between the second and third months of life [693]. Especially in newborns, performing and interpretation of UD may be difficult, as no normal values exist. After that it should be repeated annually, depending on the clinical situation. During and after puberty bladder capacity, maximum detrusor pressure and detrusor leak point pressure increase significantly [694]. Therefore, during this time, a careful follow-up is mandatory. 3.13.3.4.1. Preparation before urodynamic studies Before any UD a urine analysis should be undertaken. The first assessment should be done under antibiotic prophylaxis. A Cochrane analysis of nine randomised controlled trials showed, that the administration of prophylactic antibiotics compared to placebo reduced the risk of significant bacteriuria from 12% to 4% after UD studies. However, this was without significant difference for symptomatic UTI (20% vs. 28%), fever or discomfort [695]. If there is significant bacteriuria, antibacterial treatment should be discussed; especially in older patients a single dose may be sufficient [696]. Generally, UD-parameters should include: the cystometric capacity;the intravesical filling pressure;detrusor compliance;the intravesical pressure at the moment of voiding or leakage;the presence or absence of detrusor overactivity;the competence of the internal and external sphincter;the degree of synergy of the detrusor and sphincter during voiding;the PVR volume. In infants, information on detrusor filling pressure and the pressure and bladder volume at which the child voids or leaks can be obtained [693]. Detrusor leak point pressure is more accurate than abdominal leak point pressure but keeping the rectal probe in an infant in place can be challenging [693]. Addition of fluoroscopy (video-urodynamic study) will provide information about presence of VUR, at what pressures VUR occurs and the configuration of the bladder neck during filling and leakage or voiding. 3.13.3.4.2. Uroflowmetry Unlike in children with non-neurogenic voiding dysfunction, uroflowmetry can rarely be used since most affected patients do not void spontaneously. In those with cerebral palsy, non-neurogenic-neurogenic bladder or other neurological conditions allowing active voiding it may be a practical tool. It provides an objective way of assessing the efficiency of voiding, while recording of pelvic floor activity with electromyography (EMG) can be used to evaluate synergy between detrusor and the sphincter. PVR urine volume is measured by US. The main limitation of uroflowmetry is the compliance of the child to follow instructions [697-700]. 3.13.3.5. Urodynamic studies The standards of the ICCS should be applied to UDs in patients with neurogenic bladders and accordingly reported [571,683]. Natural fill UD in children with neurogenic bladder detects more overactivity compared with diagnoses delivered by conventional UD [701,702]. It may be an option in patients where the findings in the conventional UD are inconsistent with clinical symptoms and other clinical findings [702]. 3.13.3.6. Voiding cystourethrogram If video-urodynamic equipment is not available, a VCUG with UD is an alternative to confirm or exclude VUR and visualise the LUT including the urethra. 3.13.3.7. Renal scan DMSA (Technetium Dimercapto-Succinic Acid) Renal scan is the gold standard to evaluate renal parenchyma. In contemporary series, renal scars can be detected in up to 46% as patients get older [703-705]. In a recent study 4 out of 68 children had renal scarring, 3 had a history of febrile UTI and one a vesicoureteral reflux [655]. A positive DMSA-Scan correlates well with hypertension in adulthood, whereas US has a poor correlation with renal scars [705]. Therefore, a DMSA scan as a baseline evaluation in the first year of life is recommended. 