3.3.7. Urodynamics. 3.3.7.1. Introduction Urodynamic investigation is the only method that can objectively assess the function and dysfunction of the LUT. In neuro-urological patients, invasive urodynamic investigation is even more challenging than in general patients. Any technical source of artefacts must be critically considered. It is essential to maintain the quality of the urodynamic recording and its interpretation [1]. Same session repeat urodynamic investigations are crucial in clinical decision making, since repeat measurements may yield completely different results [102]. In patients at risk of AD, blood pressure (BP) and heartrate monitoring during the urodynamic study and other invasive procedures is mandatory [97,103]. The rectal ampulla should be empty of stool before the start of the investigation. All urodynamic findings must be reported in detail and performed, according to the ICS technical recommendations and standards [1,104]. In patients with SCI, first urodynamic investigation should take place within 3 months after SCI to facilitate early diagnosis of unfavourable urodynamic parameters and timely treatment [105] but there is need for further research regarding the urodynamic follow-up schedule during the first year after SCI [106]. 3.3.7.2. Urodynamic tests Free uroflowmetry and assessment of residual urine: It is recommended prior to planning any invasive urodynamics that patients are able to void in the usual position. For reliable information, it should be repeated at least two to three times [1]. Possible pathological findings include a low flow rate, low voided volume, intermittent flow, hesitancy and PVR. Filling cystometry: This test is the only method for quantifying the patient’s filling function. The status of LUT function must be documented during the filling phase. However, this technique has limited use as a solitary procedure. It is much more effective combined with bladder pressure measurement during micturition and is even more effective in video-urodynamics. The bladder should be empty at the start of filling. A physiological filling rate should be used with body-warm saline. Possible pathological findings include neurogenic detrusor overactivity (NDO), low bladder compliance, abnormal bladder sensations, low cystometric capacity and urinary incontinence. Detrusor leak point pressure [107]: Appears to have no use as a diagnostic tool. Some positive findings have been reported [52,108,109], but sensitivity is too low to estimate the risk to the UUT or for secondary bladder damage [110,111]. Pressure flow study (or voiding cystometry): Reflects the coordination between detrusor and urethra or pelvic floor during the voiding phase. It is even more effective if combined with filling cystometry and video-urodynamics. Possible pathological findings include detrusor underactivity, acontractility, bladder outlet obstruction (BOO), DSD, a high urethral resistance, and residual urine. Most types of obstruction caused by neuro-urological disorders are due to DSD [112,113], non-relaxing urethra, and/or non-relaxing bladder neck [114,115]. Pressure-flow analysis mainly assesses the amount of mechanical obstruction caused by the urethra’s inherent mechanical and anatomical properties. Electromyography (EMG): Reflects the activity of the external urethral sphincter, the peri-urethral striated musculature, the anal sphincter, and the striated pelvic floor muscles. Correct interpretation may be difficult due to artefacts introduced by other equipment. In the urodynamic setting, an EMG is useful as a gross indication of the patient’s ability to control the pelvic floor. Possible pathological findings include inadequate recruitment upon specific stimuli (e.g. bladder filling, involuntary detrusor contractions, onset of voiding, coughing, Valsalva manoeuvre) suggesting a diagnosis of DSD [116]. Urethral pressure measurement: Has a very limited role in neuro-urological disorders. There is no consensus on parameters indicating pathological findings [117]. Video-urodynamics: Is the combination of filling cystometry and pressure flow studies with imaging. It is the optimum procedure for urodynamic investigation in neuro-urological disorders [5]. Possible pathological findings include all those described in the filling cystometry and the pressure flow study sections, and any morphological pathology of the LUT and reflux to the UUT [118]. Ambulatory urodynamics: This is the functional investigation of the urinary tract, which predominantly uses the natural filling of the urinary tract to reproduce the patient’s normal activity. Although this type of study might be considered when conventional urodynamics does not reproduce the patient’s symptoms, its role in the neuro-urological patient still needs to be determined [119,120]. Triggered tests during urodynamics: Lower urinary tract function can be provoked by coughing, triggered voiding, or anal stretch. Fast-filling cystometry with cooled saline (the ‘ice water test’) was initially described to discriminate between upper and lower motor neuron lesions [121,122]. Patients with upper motor neuron lesions develop a detrusor contraction if the detrusor is intact, while patients with lower motor neuron lesions do not. However, the test does not seem to be fully discriminative since also non neurological and lower motor SCI have shown positive test [123,124]. Previously, a positive bethanechol test [125] (detrusor contraction > 25 cm H2O) was thought to indicate detrusor denervation hypersensitivity and the muscular integrity of an acontractile detrusor. However, in practice, the test has given equivocal results. A variation of this method was reported using intravesical electromotive administration of the bethanechol [126], but there was no published follow-up. Currently, there is no indication for this test. 3.3.7.3. Specialist uro-neurophysiological tests The following tests are advised as part of the neurological work-up [127]: electromyography (in a neurophysiological setting) of pelvic floor muscles, urethral sphincter and/or anal sphincter;nerve conduction studies of pudendal nerve;reflex latency measurements of bulbocavernosus and anal reflex arcs;evoked responses from clitoris or glans penis;sensory testing on bladder and urethra. Other elective tests, for specific conditions, may become obvious during the work-up and urodynamic investigations. 3.3.7.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for urodynamics and uro-neurophysiological tests Summary of evidenceLEUrodynamic investigation is the only method that can objectively assess the (dys-)function of the LUT.2aVideo-urodynamics is the optimum procedure for urodynamic investigation in neuro-urological disorders.4Specific uro-neurophysiological tests are elective procedures and should only be carried out in specialised settings.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform a urodynamic investigation to detect and specify lower urinary tract (dys-)function, use same session repeat measurement as it is crucial in clinical decision making.StrongNon-invasive testing is mandatory before invasive urodynamics is planned.StrongUse video-urodynamics for invasive urodynamics in neuro-urological patients. If this is not available, then perform a filling cystometry continuing into a pressure flow study.StrongUse a physiological filling rate and body-warm saline.StrongPerform blood pressure and heartrate monitoring during urodynamic investigation and other invasive procedures in patients at risk for autonomic dysreflexia.Strong 