3.6. Sexual function and fertility. This section specifically focuses on sexual dysfunction and infertility in patients with a neurological disease [443,444]. Non-neurogenic, male sexual dysfunction and infertility are covered in separate EAU Guidelines [445,446]. In neuro-urological patients sexual problems can be identified at three levels: primary (direct neurological damage), secondary (general physical disabilities) and tertiary (psychosocial and emotional issues) sexual dysfunction [447]. Adopting a systematic approach, such as the PLISSIT model (Permission, Limited Information, Specific Suggestions and Intensive Therapy) [448], provides a framework for counselling and treatment involving a stepwise approach to the management of neurogenic sexual dysfunction. Sexual dysfunction is associated with neurogenic LUT dysfunction in patients with MS [449] and SB [450]. Although various PROMs are available to evaluate sexual function, the evidence for good PROMs is limited and studies with high methodological quality are needed [77]. 3.6.1. Erectile dysfunction 3.6.1.1. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5Is) Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5Is) are recommended as first-line treatment in neurogenic ED[443,444]. In SCI patients, tadalafil, vardenafil and sildenafil have all improved retrograde ejaculation and improved erectile function and satisfaction on IIEF-15. Tadalafil 10 mg was shown to be more effective than sildenafil 50 mg. All currently available PDE5Is appear to be effective and safe, although there are no high-level evidence studies in neuro-urological patients investigating the efficacy and side effects across different PDE5Is, dosages and formulations [451]. For MS patients two studies reported significant improvement in ED when using sildenafil and tadalafil[444,452] however, another study showed no improvement in ED with sildenafil [453]. One study found a significant improvement in ED in SB patients when using sildenafil [454]. In PD normal erectile function was described in over half of the patients using sildenafil 100 mg and a significant improvement in IIEF-15 score was found compared to placebo. While most neuro-urological patients require long-term therapy for ED some have a low compliance rate or stop therapy because of side effects [455,456], most commonly headache and flushing [444]. In addition, PDE5Is may induce relevant hypotension in patients with tetraplegia/high-level paraplegia and multiple system atrophy [455,456]. As a prerequisite for successful PDE5I-therapy, some residual nerve function is required to induce erection. Since many patients with SCI use on-demand nitrates for the treatment of AD, they must be counselled that PDE5Is are contraindicated when using nitrate medication. 3.6.1.2. Drug therapy other than PDE5Is Fampridine to treat neurogenic spasticity has been shown to be beneficial in improving ED in two domains of the IIEF-15 in SCI and MS patients, however, with a significant discontinuation rate due to severe adverse events [457]. Sublingual apomorfine was shown to have poor results on ED in SCI patients and side-effects in half of the patients [458]. In PD, pergolide mesylate showed a significant improvement in IIEF-15 scores up to twelve months follow-up [459]. 3.6.1.3. Mechanical devices Mechanical devices (vacuum tumescence devices and penile rings) may be effective but are less popular [460-464]. 3.6.1.4. Intracavernous injections and intraurethral application Patients not responding to oral drugs may be offered intracavernous injections (alprostadil, papaverine and phentolamine) that have been shown to be effective in a number of neurological conditions, including SCI, MS, and diabetes mellitus [465-471], but their use requires careful dose titration and some precautions. Complications of intracavernous drugs include pain, priapism and corpora cavernosa fibrosis. Intracavernous vasoactive drug injection is the first-line therapeutic option in patients taking nitrate medications, as well as those with concerns about drug interactions with PDE5Is, or in whom PDE5Is are ineffective. The impact of intracavernous injections on ejaculation and orgasmic function, their early use for increasing the recovery rate of a spontaneous erection, and their effectiveness and tolerability in the long-term are unclear [455]. Intra-urethral alprostadil application is an alternative, but less effective, route of administration [467,472]. 3.6.1.5. Sacral neuromodulation Sacral neuromodulation for LUT dysfunction may improve sexual function; however, high level evidence studies are lacking. 3.6.1.6. Penile prostheses Penile prostheses may be considered for treatment of neurogenic ED when all conservative treatments have failed. At a mean follow-up of seven years, 83.7% of patients with SCI were able to have sexual intercourse [444]. Serious complications, including infection and prosthesis perforation, may occur in about 10% of patients, depending on implant type [473-475]. 3.6.1.7. Summary of evidence and recommendations for erectile dysfunction Summary of evidenceLEThe long-term efficacy and safety of oral PDE5Is for the treatment of ED is well documented.1bIntracavernous vasoactive drug injections have been shown to be effective in a number of neurological conditions, including SCI and MS; however, their use requires careful dose titration and precautions.3Mechanical devices (vacuum tumescence devices and penile rings) may be effective but are less popular.3Reserve penile prostheses for selected patients, those in which all conservative treatments have failed, with neurogenic ED.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingPrescribe oral phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors as first-line medical treatment in neurogenic erectile dysfunction (ED).StrongGive intracavernous injections of vasoactive drugs (alone or in combination) as second-line medical treatment in neurogenic ED.StrongOffer mechanical devices such as vacuum devices and rings to patients with neurogenic ED.Strong 3.6.2. Male fertility Male fertility can be compromised in the neurological patient by ED, ejaculation disorder, impaired sperm quality or various combinations of these three disorders. Among the major conditions contributing to neurogenic infertility are pelvic and retroperitoneal surgery, diabetes mellitus, SB, MS and SCI [476]. Erectile dysfunction is managed as described previously. Retrograde ejaculation may be reversed by sympathomimetic agents contracting the bladder neck, including imipramine, ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine [476]. The use of a balloon catheter to obstruct the bladder neck may be effective in obtaining antegrade ejaculation [477]. If antegrade ejaculation is not achieved, the harvest of semen from the urine may be considered [478]. Prostatic massage is safe and easy to use for obtaining semen in men with lesions above Th 10 [479]. In several patients, vibrostimulation or transrectal electroejaculation are needed for sperm retrieval [476,480,481]. Semen retrieval is more likely with vibrostimulation in men with lesions above Th 10 [482-484]. In men with SCI, especially at or above Th 6, AD might occur during sexual activity and ejaculation [485,486]; patients at risk and fertility clinics must be informed and aware of this potentially life-threatening condition. In SCI patients the use of oral midodrine can improve sperm retrieval at vibrostimulation [487]. In men with MS, use of disease modifying drugs during the conception phase, has not been associated with altered pregnancy outcomes [488]. Surgical procedures, such as, microsurgical epididymal sperm aspiration or testicular sperm extraction, may be used if vibrostimulation and electroejaculation are not successful [489,490]. Pregnancy rates in patients with SCI are lower than in the general population, but since the introduction of intracytoplasmic sperm injection, men with SCI now have a good chance of becoming biological fathers [491-493]. 3.6.2.1. Sperm quality and motility The following has been reported on sperm quality and motility: bladder management with clean IC may improve semen quality compared to indwelling catheterisation, reflex voiding or bladder expression [494];in SCI patients sperm quality decreases at the early post-traumatic phase demonstrating lower spermatozoid vitality (necrospermia), reduced motility (asthenospermia) and leucospermia [489];long-term valproate treatment for epilepsy negatively influences sperm count and motility [495];vibrostimulation produces samples with better sperm motility than electrostimulation [496,497];electro-ejaculation with interrupted current produces better sperm motility than continuous current [498];freezing of sperm is unlikely to improve fertility rates in men with SCI [499]. 3.6.2.2. Summary of evidence and recommendations for male fertility Summary of evidenceLEVibrostimulation and transrectal electroejaculation have been shown to be effective for sperm retrieval in neuro-urological patients.1bSurgical procedures, such as, microsurgical epididymal sperm aspiration or testicular sperm extraction, may be used if vibrostimulation and electroejaculation are not successful.3In men with SCI at or above Th 6, AD might occur during sexual activity and ejaculation.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform vibrostimulation and transrectal electroejaculation for sperm retrieval in men with spinal cord injury.StrongPerform microsurgical epididymal sperm aspiration, testicular sperm extraction and intracytoplasmic sperm injection after failed vibrostimulation and/or transrectal electroejaculation in men with spinal cord injury.StrongCounsel men with spinal cord injury at or above Th 6 and fertility clinics about the potentially life-threatening condition of autonomic dysreflexia.Strong 3.6.3. Female sexuality The most relevant publications on neurogenic female sexual dysfunction are in women with SCI and MS, while there is only limited evidence for women with stroke and SB. After SCI, about 65-80% of women continue to be sexually active, but to a much lesser extent than before the injury, and about 25% report a decreased satisfaction with their sexual life [500-502]. Although sexual dysfunction is very common in women with MS, it is still often overlooked by medical professionals [503,504]. A vast majority of female SB patients showed sexual dysfunction [505] and considered information about sexuality from their physicians insufficient [506]. Women with SCI reported dissatisfaction with the quality and quantity of sexuality-related rehabilitation services and were less likely to receive sexual information than men [507-509]. Similarly, majority of female stroke patients are not sexually satisfied [510]. The greatest physical barrier to sexual activity is UI. A correlation has been found between the urodynamic outcomes of low bladder capacity, compliance and high maximum detrusor pressure and sexual dysfunction in MS patients. Problems with positioning and spasticity affect mainly tetraplegic patients. Peer support may help to optimise the sexual adjustment of women with SCI in achieving a more positive self-image, self-esteem and feelings of being attractive to themselves and others [500,511-513]. The use of specific drugs for sexual dysfunction is indicated to treat inadequate lubrication. Data on sildenafil for treating female sexual dysfunction are poor and controversial [444]. Although good evidence exists that psychological interventions are effective in the treatment of female hypoactive sexual desire disorder and female orgasmic disorder [514], there is a lack of high-level evidence studies in the neurological population. Neurophysiological studies have shown that women with the ability to perceive Th 11-L2 pin-prick sensations may have psychogenic genital vasocongestion. Reflex lubrication and orgasm are more prevalent in women with SCI who have preserved the sacral reflex arc (S2-S5), even when it has not been shown in an individual woman that a specific level and degree of lesion is the cause of a particular sexual dysfunction. In SCI women with a complete lesion of the sacral reflex, arousal and orgasm may be evoked through stimulation of other erogenous zones above the level of lesions [507,515,516]. Sacral neuromodulation for LUT dysfunction may improve sexual function but high-evidence studies are lacking [444]. 3.6.4. Female fertility There are few studies on female fertility in neurological patients. More than a third (38%) of women with epilepsy had infertility and the relevant predictors were exposure to multiple (three or more) antiepileptic drugs, older age and lower education [517]. Although it seems that the reproductive capacity of women with SCI is only temporarily affected by SCI with cessation of menstruation for approximately six months after SCI [518], there are no high-level evidence studies. About 70% of sexually active women use some form of contraception after injury, but fewer women use the birth control pill compared to before their injury [519]. Women with SCI are more likely to suffer complications during pregnancy, labour and delivery compared to able-bodied women. Complications of labour and delivery include bladder problems, spasticity, pressure sores, anaemia, and AD [520-524]. Obstetric outcomes include higher rates of Caesarean sections and an increased incidence of low birth-weight babies [519,522-524]. Epidural anaesthesia is chosen and effective for most patients with AD during labour and delivery [525,526]. There is very little published data on women’s experience of the menopause following SCI [527]. Women with MS who plan a pregnancy should evaluate their current drug treatment with their treating physician [528-530]. Clinical management should be individualised to optimise both the mother’s reproductive outcomes and MS course [528,529,531]. 3.6.4.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for female sexuality and fertility Summary of evidenceLEData on specific drugs for treating female sexual dysfunction are poor and controversial.4There are limited numbers of studies on female fertility in neurological patients, clinical management should be individualised to optimise both the mother’s reproductive outcomes and medical condition.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not offer medical therapy for the treatment of neurogenic sexual dysfunction in women.StrongTake a multidisciplinary approach, tailored to individual patient’s needs and preferences, in the management of fertility, pregnancy and delivery in women with neurological diseases.Strong 