3.7. Follow-up. 3.7.1. Introduction Neuro-urological disorders are often unstable, and the symptoms may vary considerably, even within a relatively short period. Regular follow-up is therefore necessary to assess the UUT [132]. Depending on the type of the underlying neurological pathology and the current stability of the neuro-urological symptoms, the interval between initial investigations and control diagnostics may vary and, in many cases, should not exceed one to two years. high-risk neuro-urological this interval should be much shorter. The UUT should be checked by ultrasonography at regular intervals in high-risk patients; about once every six months [6,532]. In these patients, physical examination and urine laboratory should take place every year [6,532]. In MS patients higher scores on the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) are associated with risk factors for UUT deterioration [533]. A urodynamic investigation should be performed as a diagnostic baseline, and repeated during follow-up, more frequently in high-risk patients [6,532]. The bladder diary can aid in detecting MS patients that require urodynamic investigations [534]. In addition, bladder wall thickness can be measured on ultrasonography as an additional risk assessment for upper tract damage [535], although a ‘safe’ cut-off threshold for this has not been agreed [536]. The utility of DMSA (dimercaptosuccinic acid) for follow-up of neuro-urological patients has not been fully evaluated [537]. Any significant clinical change warrants further, specialised, investigation [6,532]. However, there is a lack of high level evidence studies on this topic and every recommendation must be viewed critically in each individual neuro-urological patient [132]. The increased prevalence of muscle invasive bladder cancer in neuro-urological patients also warrants long-term follow-up [260]. The exact frequency of cystoscopy with or without cytology remains unknown, but presence of risk factors similar to the general population should trigger further investigation [538]. Adolescent patients with neurological pathology are at risk of being lost to follow-up during the transition to adulthood. It is important that a standardised approach during this transition is adopted to improve follow-up and specific treatment during adult life [539]. 3.7.2. Summary of evidence and recommendations for follow-up Summary of evidenceLENeuro-urological disorders are often unstable, and the symptoms may vary considerably; therefore, regular follow-up is necessary.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingAssess the upper urinary tract at regular intervals in high-risk patients.StrongAny significant clinical changes should instigate further, specialised, investigation.StrongPerform urodynamic investigation as a mandatory baseline diagnostic intervention in high-risk patients at regular intervals.Strong 