3.4.3. Choice of treatment. 3.4.3.1. Lifestyle factors As reported above, functional hypogonadism is frequently associated with obesity and metabolic disorders [114]. Therefore, weight loss and lifestyle changes should be the first approach for all overweight and obese men with hypogonadism. A previous meta-analysis documented that a low-calorie diet can to revert obesity-associated secondary hypogonadism by increasing total testosterone and fT, reducing oestrogens and restoring normal gonadotropin circulating levels [115]. This was confirmed in an updated meta-analysis showing that the increase in testosterone is significantly associated with weight reduction [116]. Similar results can be obtained through physical activity, which is associated with the duration of scheduled exercise and weight loss obtained [116]. However, it should be recognised that the increase in testosterone levels observed after a low-calorie diet and physical activity is small (1-2 nmol) [115,116]. In addition, 60-86% of weight lost is regained after three years and 75-121% after five years [117]. Lifestyle changes represent an essential part of the management of obesity; however, some evidence suggests that when compared to lifestyle modifications alone, testosterone therapy-treated obese men benefit most from relief of their symptoms associated with testosterone deficiency, whereas those not treated did not benefit [82]. There is limited evidence to suggest that combination of life-style interventions and testosterone therapy in symptomatic hypogonadal men might result in better outcomes [103]. As described above, the T4DM study has demonstrated that over two-years testosterone therapy with lifestyle intervention was superior to lifestyle intervention alone in reducing waist circumference and total and abdominal fat content. There was no significant reduction in body weight when compared to lifestyle intervention alone [33]. Interestingly, recent data also showed that weight loss obtained thought the use of Glucagon-like peptide-1 analogues analogues can result in better testosterone increases as compared with diet programs alone [1972]. 3.4.3.2. Medical preparations Several testosterone formulations are available (Table 5). Direct comparisons among different testosterone products are still lacking. Candidates for testosterone therapy should be adequately informed about the possible risks and benefits of all available testosterone preparations. The final choice should be based on the clinical situation, testosterone formulation availability, and patient needs and expectations [22,118]. 3.4.3.2.1. Oral formulations An oral formulation has been available in oleic acid since the 1970s, and has been recently reformulated in a mixture of castor oil and propylene glycol laureate (testosterone undecanoate [TU] caps), to allow the drug to be maintained at room temperature without degradation [22,118]. The main limitation is related to poor bioavailability, which is strongly dependent on dietary fat content [22,118]. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a new formulation of oral TU in a liquid-filled soft gel capsule, which improved oral availability [119]. Available evidence showed that TU capsule formulations can reach steady 24-hour average serum testosterone levels in more than 80% of hypogonadal men, thus resulting in a significant improvement of all sexual function domains at all time points when compared to baseline along with an excellent safety profile [119]. More recently, the FDA has approved a new oral formulation which contains as carriers Vitamin E, phytosterol esters, polyoxyl 40 hydrogenated castor oil and propylene glycol monolaurate [119]. For all new oral TU formulations a mild increase in arterial blood pressure has been reported. Hence, the FDA has required a black box warning that these drugs can induce a blood pressure increase [119]. Mesterolone is a 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) derivate available for oral administration. Along with DHT, mesterolone cannot be converted to oestrogens and can only be used for a limited period and for specific indications, such as the presence of painful gynaecomastia. However, the lack of a full spectrum of testosterone bioactivity strongly limits its long-term use [22]. 3.4.3.2.2. Parenteral formulations Injectable testosterone preparations can be classified according to their half-lives (Table 5). Testosterone propionate is a short-term ester formulation requiring multiple fractionated doses (usually 50-100 mg, every two to three days), thus representing a major limitation for its use [22,118]. Cypionate and enanthate-T esters are short-term formulations, requiring administration every two to four weeks. A formulation containing mixed testosterone esters (TU, isocaproate, phenyl propionate, propionate) which has the benefit of a steady release of testosterone into the circulation, is available in some countries. The use of these older formulations is associated with wide fluctuations in plasma testosterone concentrations and is often reported as unpleasant by patients potentially resulting in adverse effects, such as polycythaemia [22,118,120]. A longer-lasting TU injectable formulation is widely available [22,118], with a good safety/benefit profile allowing the maintenance of normal stable testosterone levels at a dose of 1,000 mg initially every twelve weeks, following a six-week loading dose, but can be adjusted to a frequency of ten to fourteen weeks dependent on the trough (pre-injection level) after three to five injections to maintain levels in the therapeutic range (usually > 12 and < 18 nmol/L) [22,118,121]. 3.4.3.2.3. Transdermal testosterone preparations Among the available transdermal formulations, testosterone gels represent the most frequently used preparations. The gel is quickly absorbed by the stratum corneum, creating a reservoir within the subcutaneous tissues from where testosterone is continuously delivered for 24 hours, after a single daily application. These formulations have been shown to normalise serum testosterone levels with an excellent safety profile [22,118]. The introduction of specific devices and skin enhancers has resulted in better skin penetration of the drugs, thus reducing potential adverse effects. Local skin adverse effects are limited when compared to those with traditional testosterone patches, but they potentially allow transference of testosterone during close contact with the skin surface. The risk can be reduced by wearing clothing or by applying the gel on skin surfaces not usually touched (e.g., the inner thigh surface) [22,118]. To reduce the total amount of gel applied and residual quantities remaining on the skin, new formulations of testosterone gel have been introduced with a testosterone concentration of 1.62-2% [22,118]. Another transdermal testosterone formulation includes a topical, alcohol-based testosterone (2%) solution, which must be applied to the underarm once daily, using a metered dose applicator [22,118]. This testosterone formulation is not available in Europe. Testosterone levels should be monitored to optimise the testosterone dose. Blood collection is best taken two to four hours after gel application to use the peak level of testosterone absorbed as a reference for adequate therapeutic levels. Levels of testosterone after application can vary and a repeat measurement may be indicated especially as sometimes, inadvertently, the skin over the venipuncture site can be contaminated by the gel, leading to falsely elevated results. In some European countries, DHT is available as a hydroalcoholic 2.5% gel. It is rapidly absorbed, reaching a steady state in two to three days [22,118]. Similar to that reported for mesterolone, DHT is not aromatised but can be useful for treating particular conditions, such as gynaecomastia and microphallus [22,118]. 3.4.3.2.4. Transmucosal formulations A testosterone buccal system is still available in several countries. It consists of a sustained-release muco-adhesive buccal-testosterone-tablet requiring twice-daily application to the upper gums. The tablet does not dissolve completely in the mouth and must be removed after twelve hours. This formulation has been proven to restore testosterone levels within the physiological range with minimal or transient local problems, including gum oedema, blistering and gingivitis [22,118]. A gel for intranasal administration is available in some countries, including the USA and Canada. It requires administration two or three times daily using a specific metered-dose pump. The application is rapid, non-invasive, and convenient, and avoids secondary transference observed with other topical products [22,118]. Preliminary results suggest that intranasal testosterone is associated with lower suppression of Gn levels and with a lower risk of haematocrit increases [122]. 3.4.3.2.5. Subdermal depots The implantation of testosterone pellets, available in a limited number of countries, represents the longest available testosterone formulation lasting from four to seven months. The procedure is invasive and may be unattractive to patients [22,118]. 3.4.3.2.6. Anti-oestrogens Anti-oestrogens, including selective oestrogen receptor (ER) modulators (SERMs) and aromatase inhibitors (AI) have been suggested as off-label treatments to restore testosterone levels and fertility in men with functional secondary hypogonadism or idiopathic infertility. They work by preventing down-regulation of the HPG axis by oestrogens and for this reason are particularly useful in men with obesity and metabolic disorders [116,123]. In the latter case, the hypothesis is that the excess of adipose tissue leads to increased aromatase activity and oestrogens levels resulting in impairment of the HPG [114]. Due to their putative mechanism of action, they require an intact HPG axis and cannot work in primary hypogonadism or secondary hypogonadism due to organic damage of the HPG axis. Both types of SERMs, which bind ERs with an agonist or antagonist effect depending upon the target tissue, and AIs, which prevent androgens from being converted into oestrogens by aromatase, have been used in clinical practice [22,118]. The evidence published so far is poor; all these products are off-label treatments and SERMs, due to their agonistic effect on venous vessels, could predispose men to the development of venous thromboembolism [22,118]. In this context patients should be warned of the potential increased risk of venous thromboembolism, although data are lacking. Long-term use of these agents can lead to reduced bone density and the development of osteoporosis, potentially increasing fracture risk. 3.4.3.2.7. Gonadotropins Gonadotropin therapy should be considered the standard in men with secondary hypogonadism who desire paternity (Table 5) [22,118]. Recombinant hCG (rhCG) and LH (rLH) formulations offer comparable effects to urinary-derived preparations [118]. According to a meta-analysis of the available evidence, hCG should be administered with FSH since combined therapy results in better outcomes. Similar to recombinant hCG, recombinant FSH (rFSH) offers comparable effects to urinary-derived preparations [121]. Table 5: Available preparations for hypogonadism treatment FormulationChemical structuret ½Standard dosageAdvantagesDisadvantagesGONADOTROPINSHuman chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG)ExtractiveHCG purified from the urine of pregnant womenNA1,000-2,000 IU3 times/weekLow costMultiple weekly administrationRecombinantHuman recombinant HCGNANo data on menNANALuteotropic hormone (LH)RecombinantHuman recombinant LHNANo data on menNANAFollicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)ExtractiveFSH purified from urine of pregnant womenNA75-150 IU3 times/weekLow costMultiple weekly administrationRecombinantHuman recombinant FSHNA75-150 IU3 times/weekNAMultiple weekly administrationTESTOSTERONE PREPARATIONSOralTestosterone undecanoate17-α-hydroxylester4 hours120-240 mg 2-3 times daily- Reduction of liver involvement- Oral convenience- Modifiable dosage- Unpredictable absorption depending on dietary fat content- Must be taken with mealsTestosterone undecanoateself-emulsifying delivery system17-α-hydroxylester2-5 hours100-237 mg 2 times daily- Oral convenience- Modifiable dosage- Quick reversal- Gastrointestinal side effects- increase in blood pressureMesterolone1α-methyl-4, 5α-dihydro-testosterone12 hours50-100 mg 2-3 times daily- Oral convenience- Modifiable dosage- Useful in gynaecomastia- Not aromatisableParentalTestosterone enanthate17-α-hydroxylester4-5 days250 mg every 2-3 weeks- Low cost- Short-acting preparation allowing drug withdrawal in case of adverse effects- Fluctuations in circulating testosterone levels- Multiple injections- Relative risk of polycythemiaTestosterone cypionate17-α-hydroxylester8 days200 mg every 2-3 weeksTestosterone propionate17-α-hydroxylester20 hours100 mg every 2 daysTestosterone ester mixture*4-androsten-3-one-17 beta-hydroxy-androst-4-en-3-one4-5 days250 mg every 3 weeksTestosterone undecanoate in castor oil17-α-hydroxylester34 days1,000 mg every 10-14 weeks*750 mg every 10 weeks- Steady-state testosterone level without fluctuation- Long-lasting- Less frequent administration- Pain at the injection site- Long-acting preparation not allowing rapid drug withdrawal in case of adverse effectsSurgical implantsNative testosteroneN/A4-6 200 mg implants lasting up to 6 months- Long duration and constant serum testosterone level- Placement is invasive- Risk of extrusion and site infectionsTRANSDERMALTestosterone patchesNative testosterone10 hours50-100 mg/daySteady-state testosterone level without fluctuation- Skin irritation- Daily administrationTestosterone gel 1-2%Native testosterone6 hours50-100 mg/day- Possible transfer during intimate contact- Daily administrationUnderarm testosterone (testosterone solution 2%)Native testosteroneNA60-120 mg/dayDihydro-testosterone gel 2.5%Native dihydro-testosteroneNA34-70 mg/day- Steady-state testosterone level without fluctuation- Useful in gynaecomastia- Possible transfer during intimate contact- Daily administration- Not aromatisableTRANSMUCOSALTestosterone buccal systemNative testosterone12 hours60 mg3 times dailySteady-state testosterone level without fluctuation- Possible oral irritation- Twice-daily dosing- Unpleasant tasteTestosterone nasalNative testosterone6 hours33 mg3 times daily- Nasal irritation- Multiple daily administrations NA = not applicable.* Testosterone ester mixture - propionate (30mg), phenylpropionate (60mg), isocaproate (60mg), decanoate (100mg) 3.4.3.2.8. Summary of evidence and recommendations for choice of treatment for LOH Summary of evidenceLEWeight loss obtained through a low-calorie diet and regular physical activity results in a small improvement in testosterone levels.1aTestosterone gels and long-acting injectable testosterone undecanoate preparations provide optimal safety profiles.1aGonadotropin treatment can be used to restore fertility in men with secondary hypogonadism.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingTreat, when indicated, organic causes of hypogonadism (e.g., pituitary masses, hyperprolactinemia, etc).StrongImprove lifestyle and reduce weight (e.g., obesity); withdraw, when possible, concomitant drugs that can impair testosterone production; treat other co-morbidities, when possible, before starting testosterone therapy.StrongFully inform patients about the expected benefits and adverse effects of any treatment option. Select the testosterone preparation in a joint decision process, and fully inform patients of the risks and benefits.StrongUse testosterone gels rather than long-acting depot administration when starting initial treatment in high-risk men.Weak 