3.4.2. Testosterone therapy outcomes. 3.4.2.1. Sexual dysfunction Sexual concerns are the main symptoms of hypogonadal patients [3,8,83,84]. A consistent body of evidence shows that testosterone therapy in hypogonadal men (total testosterone < 12 nmol/L) may have a beneficial effect on several aspects of sexual life; in contrast, there is no evidence of benefits in using testosterone therapy for treating sexual dysfunction in eugonadal men [69,85-87]. The beneficial effect on sexual function seems to be more related to testosterone level normalisation than the specific testosterone formulations used [87,88]. A meta-analysis of placebo-controlled RCTs showed that testosterone therapy significantly improves erectile function (as measured by IIEF-Erectile Function domain score) and that patients with more severe hypogonadism (i.e., total testosterone < 8 nmol/L) are more likely to achieve better improvement than patients with milder hypogonadism (i.e., total testosterone < 12 nmol/L) [69]. Similar results were observed for sexual desire; however, the presence of metabolic comorbidity (such as diabetes and obesity) decreased the magnitude of these improvements. In particular, testosterone therapy alone resulted in a clinically effective outcome only in patients with milder ED [69]. Similar results have also been confirmed in an update analysis [89] and in a recently published Cochrane review [1970]. In line with these data, report from the non-inferiority “Testosterone Replacement Therapy for Assessment of Long-term Vascular Events and Efficacy Response in Hypogonadal Men (TRAVERSE)” study, showed in middle-aged and older hypogonadal (total testosterone < 10.4 nmol/L) men with pre-existing or a high risk of CVD, testosterone therapy with gel for two years improved sexual activity, hypogonadal symptoms, and sexual desire, but not erectile function [90]. Other sexual function parameters, such as intercourse, orgasm and overall satisfaction, were all improved compared with placebo [69,89]. Men with a comorbidity, such as T2DM, usually show modest improvements in terms of sexual function after testosterone therapy and may potentially require concomitant phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5Is) to improve effectiveness [3,87]. A meta-analysis including 913 patients derived from eight RCTs suggested that combination therapy (testosterone and PDE5Is) was superior when compared to PDE5Is alone in improving erectile function [92]. The specific beneficial effect derived from the combined use of testosterone therapy and PDE5Is is unclear [85]. Similarly, information related to the combined use of testosterone therapy with other ED drug therapies is lacking [3,87]. The Sexual Function Trial of the Testosterone Trials (TTrials) (one of the largest placebo-controlled trials on testosterone therapy) documented consistent improvements in 10 of 12 measures of sexual activities in older (≥ 65 years) hypogonadal men, particularly in frequency of intercourse, masturbation and nocturnal erections (as measured by PDQ-Q4) [93,1973]. The magnitude in improvement was shown to be proportional to the increase in serum total testosterone, fT and E2 levels, it was not possible to demonstrate a threshold level [94]. A study of 220 men with MetS with or without T2DM also found that sexual function improved in men who reported sexual problems with improvement in IIEF scores, with specific increases in libido and sexual satisfaction [29]. 3.4.2.2. Vitality and physical strength The role of testosterone in stimulating muscle growth and strength is well established. Accordingly, androgenic-anabolic steroids (AAS) have been used as performance-enhancing agents to increase physical performance in competitive sport [95]. In this regard, testosterone therapy in hypogonadal men has been shown to increase muscle mass and reduce fat mass, with limited effects on final weight [40]. Despite this evidence, the role of testosterone therapy in older men with mobility limitations remains unclear. The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999-2004 [96] was unable to detect any association between overall circulating testosterone levels and the amount of physical activity. However, among non-obese men, those in the highest physical activity tertile were significantly less likely to have low or low-normal testosterone than those in the lowest tertile. Data from TTrials indicated that testosterone therapy did not substantially increase the fraction of men whose six-minute walking distance increased > 50 m or the absolute increase in the distance walked by those enrolled in the physical function trial [93]. However, when the whole population of the TTrials was considered, a significant, although modest, positive effect on these two parameters was reported [93]. Similar data were derived from the Vitality Trial [93]. As support of the aforementioned considerations, a recent meta-analysis including 2043 subjects older than 60 years failed to show a significant improvement of muscle strength of testosterone therapy when compared to placebo [97]. 3.4.2.3. Mood and cognition Several observational studies have documented a relationship between depressive symptoms, reduced QoL and hypogonadism [98,99]. However, the specific relationship between hypogonadism and the incidence of depression is still unclear [99]. Only a few placebo-controlled RCTs have investigated the role of testosterone therapy in improving depressive symptoms. Data derived from TTrials showed that testosterone therapy improved mood, and depressive symptoms as continuous measures using several instruments [93]. However, the final effect was small in magnitude. In line with this data, the largest meta-analysis of available studies, including 1,890 hypogonadal men (baseline total testosterone < 12 nmol/L or fT < 225 pmol/L) men from 27 RCTs, documented that the positive effect of testosterone therapy was particularly evident in patients with milder symptoms [100]. The BLAST study of testosterone therapy in T2DM reported that those men with depression were less likely to respond with regards to symptoms of sexual dysfunction compared to men without depression [35]. Robust data on the effect of testosterone therapy on QoL are limited. Although recent meta-analyses suggest a significant effect of testosterone therapy over placebo, the magnitude is low and the heterogeneity high, therefore reducing the scientific value of the effect [88,101]. The role of testosterone therapy in patients with cognitive impairment is even more uncertain. The TTrials evaluated the effect of testosterone therapy in 493 individuals with age-associated memory impairment to assess possible improvement of several aspects of cognitive function. However, results failed to demonstrate any beneficial effect of testosterone therapy in improving cognitive function [93]. Similarly, a meta-analysis involving 17 studies enrolling 1,438 patients with a mean age of 70.4 years and a mean follow-up of 45.6 weeks did not find any effect of testosterone therapy on cognitive domains [102]. 3.4.2.4. Body composition and metabolic profile Late onset hypogonadism is associated with a greater percentage of fat mass and a lesser lean mass compared to testosterone-repleted men [103]. The major effect of low testosterone is to increase visceral adiposity but it also leads to deposition of lipids in the liver and muscle and is associated with atherosclerosis [25]. Some published data have suggested that testosterone therapy reduces percentage body fat and increases lean mass [104]. Testosterone therapy has also been found to decrease waist circumference, body weight and BMI, with these effects more predominant after twelve months of treatment [104-106]. Over two years, the T4DM RCT reported that men on testosterone therapy and a lifestyle programme had a greater reduction in waist circumference, total and abdominal fat mass and an increase in total and arm muscle mass and an increased strength in the non-dominant hand compared to a lifestyle programme alone [33]. There was a trend toward reduction in body weight although this approached significance but did not reach significance. The latter result is probably compounded by the increase in muscle mass as well as the decrease in fat mass. However, it should be recognised that the results of previous studies are mainly derived from registry and observational trials, which have important limitations due to the risk of selection bias for the non-random assignment of testosterone exposure. Accordingly, data derived from RCTs showed only an improvement of fat mass and lean mass of the same amount without any modifications in body weight [40]. A meta-analysis including seventeen RCTs specifically investigated the role of testosterone therapy on several metabolic parameters in patients with T2DM and/or MetS [39]. In line with what was reported in the general population, testosterone therapy was associated with an improvement in body composition either in T2DM or MetS without any effects on body weight. Similarly positive effects were also observed on fasting glycemia and insulin resistance (HOMA index) whilst more conflicting data were obtained for HbA1c and lipid profile [39]. 3.4.2.5. Bone Evidence suggests that bone mineralisation requires circulating sex steroids within the normal range [107]. The possible association between mild hypogonadism and osteopenia/osteoporosis is weak, whereas severe hypogonadism (total testosterone < 3.5 nM) is frequently associated with bone loss and osteoporosis, independent of patient age [107]. Three independent meta-analyses showed a positive effect of testosterone therapy on bone mineral density (BMD), with the highest effect at the lumber level [108-110]. Interestingly, the latter meta-analysis has provided novel evidence that the role of testosterone on BMD was even higher in patients with diabetes [110], who are at a higher risk of hypogonadism and bone fracture [39,111,112]. Similarly, data derived from TTrials and the T4DM studies confirmed that testosterone therapy increased BMD in hypogonadal ageing men [93,113]. However, available data are insufficient to determine the effect of testosterone therapy alone on the risk of fractures [107]. Recent data from the aforementioned TRAVERSE trial quite surprisingly showed an increased incidence of overall bone fractures among men who have received testosterone therapy compared to those who received placebo [1971]. However, it should be recognized that no difference in major osteoporotic fractures (i.e., hip, wrist, humerus, clinical spine and hip) were observed between groups. Moreover, this observation was derived from patient reports and therefore it deserves to be more specifically adjudicated. In conclusion, it should be recognized that the use of testosterone therapy as an adjunct to anti-resorptive treatment in hypogonadal patients at high risk of fractures has not been established. Therefore, anti-resorptive therapy must be the first-choice treatment in hypogonadal men at high risk for bone fractures. The combination of anti-resorptive treatment and testosterone therapy should be offered only in conjunction with hypogonadism-related symptoms. 3.4.2.6. Summary of evidence and recommendations for testosterone therapy outcome Summary of evidenceLETestosterone therapy can improve:Milder forms of ED and libido in hypogonadal men;1aOther sexual symptoms, including intercourse frequency, orgasm and overall satisfaction.1bBody composition and insulin resistance.1aWeight, waist circumference and lipid profile, but the evidence is conflicting.3Mild depressive symptoms in hypogonadal men.1aBone mineral density, but information related to fracture risk is lacking.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not use testosterone therapy in eugonadal men.StrongUse testosterone therapy as first-line treatment in hypogonadal patients with mild erectile dysfunction (ED).StrongUse a combination of phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors and testosterone therapy in more severe forms of ED.WeakUse conventional medical therapies for severe depressive symptoms and osteoporosis.StrongDo not use testosterone therapy to reduce weight and enhance cardio-metabolic status.WeakDo not use testosterone therapy to improve cognition vitality and physical strength in ageing men.Strong 