7.7.6. Special situations. 7.7.6.1. Impact of prior neoadjuvant/adjuvant therapy on treatment sequence Peri-operative systemic treatment is increasingly used in UC including cisplatin-based chemotherapy in the neoadjuvant setting for BC and adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy for upper tract UC [543]. Many ongoing phase III trials investigate the use of immunotherapy in this setting as well (see Section 7.6.2). So far, one trial has reported a significant DFS benefit for adjuvant treatment with nivolumab compared with placebo whereas one trial reported no significant benefit using atezolizumab vs. placebo in the same setting whilst another trial reported negative findings [481,484]. It is expected that an increased number of patients with metastatic UC will have received pre-treatment with platinum and/or immunotherapy agents. No prospective trials have investigated the treatment of such patients. The choice of treatment in these patients depends on the applied peri-operative treatment and the time until relapse. If at least 12 months have passed since the end of peri-operative treatment the same systemic treatment as in treatment-naive patients is recommended. 7.7.6.2. Systemic treatment of metastatic disease with histology other than pure urothelial carcinoma Pure UC represents the predominant histology in over 90% of patients with mUC. subtypes (e.g. micropapillary, nested, sarcomatoid) and divergent differentiation (e.g., SCC, adenocarcinoma) can be found in addition to pure UC in up to 33% of patients. Such patients were often excluded from large phase II and phase III trials and therefore the knowledge about the best management of such patients is limited. The respective literature was reviewed recently [66] and an expert Delphi survey and consensus conference provided guidance [82]. In case of predominant pure UC it is recommended to treat patients with mixed histology the same way as patients with a pure UC histology. Patients with predominant non-urothelial differentiation such as small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, urachal adenocarcinoma, SCC and adenocarcinoma should be treated individually. 