7.7.5. Current status of predictive biomarkers. The most important advance in recent years has been the recognition of alterations in FGFR3 including mutations and gene fusions as a predictive marker for response to FGFR inhibitors [234]. It is recommended to screen mUC patients ideally at diagnosis of metastatic disease for FGFR3 alterations to plan optimal treatment including trials. Many efforts have focused on markers for predicting response to immune checkpoint inhibition. Programmed death-ligand 1 expression by immunohistochemistry has been evaluated in many studies with mixed and, so far, inconclusive results. This may in part be related to the use of different antibodies and various scoring systems evaluating different compartments i.e., tumour cells, immune cells, or both. A major limitation of PD-L1 staining relates to the significant proportion of PD-L1-negative patients that respond to immune checkpoint blockade. The predictive value of PD-L1 was not confirmed in large phase III trials evaluating the integration of immunotherapy in the first-line setting for mUC [514-516]. At present, the only indication for PD-L1 testing in mUC is dictated by current EMA approvals and relates to the potential use of immune checkpoint inhibitors as first-line monotherapy in patients unfit for cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. Another biomarker that has been evaluated for predicting response to immunotherapy is high TMB [238]. Neoantigen burden and TMB have been associated with response to immune checkpoint blockade in several malignancies. High TMB has been associated with response to immune checkpoint inhibitors in metastatic UC in small single-arm trials [236,239] but was not confirmed so far in RCTs. Other markers that have been evaluated in predicting response to immune checkpoint inhibitors include molecular subtypes, CD8 expression by immunohistochemistry and other immune gene cell signatures. Recent work has focused on the importance of stroma including the role of TGFs in predicting response to immune checkpoint blockade [242,243]. In conclusion, apart from FGFR3 alterations, there are currently no further validated predictive molecular markers that are routinely used in clinical practice. 