7.7.3. Further-line systemic therapy for metastatic disease. 7.7.3.1. Introduction Due to the results of the EV-302/KEYNOTE A39 trial and the expected paradigm shift in first-line therapy with establishment of the EV plus Pembrolizumab combination, as well as the CheckMate 901 trial with the combination of cisplatin, gemcitabine and nivolumab, selecting subsequent therapy lines in patients who fail during or progress after first-line treatment poses a significant challenge. Depending on the choice of first-line therapy the following options exist. 7.7.3.2. Chemotherapy In patients eligible for combination therapy having received EV plus pembrolizumab, platinum-based chemotherapy with gemcitabine plus cisplatin or carboplatin may be considered, however, data is limited for this new post EV plus pembrolizumab clinical disease state and toxicities, e.g. neuropathy from prior therapy must be taken into consideration in determining a treatment plan. For patients already having received platinum-based chemotherapy with or without immunotherapy further -line chemotherapy data are highly variable and mainly derive from small single-arm phase II trials apart from one single phase III RCT. A reasonable strategy has been to re-challenge former platinum-sensitive patients if progression occurred at least six to twelve months after first-line platinum-based combination chemotherapy. A retrospective analysis of 296 patients within the RISC cohort (Retrospective International Study of Cancers of the Urothelium) revealed that subsequent platinum-based combination chemotherapy achieved a somewhat higher disease control rate (57.4% vs. 44.8%, p.= 0.041) and OS (7.9 vs. 5.5 months, p = 0.035) compared to subsequent non-platinum-based chemotherapy [517]. Second-line response rates of single-agent treatment with paclitaxel (weekly), docetaxel, gemcitabine, nab-paclitaxel, oxaliplatin, ifosfamide, topotecan, pemetrexed, lapatinib, gefitinib and bortezomib have ranged between 0% and 28% in small phase II trials [518,519]. The paclitaxel/gemcitabine combination has shown good response rates in small single-arm studies but no adequate phase III RCT has been conducted [520,521]. Vinflunine was tested in a phase III RCT and compared against BSC in patients progressing after first-line treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy [522]. The results showed a very modest ORR (8.6%), a clinical benefit with a favourable safety profile and a survival benefit, which was however only statistically significant in the eligible patient population (not in the ITT population). A randomised phase III trial evaluated the addition of the angiogenesis inhibitor ramucirumab to docetaxel chemotherapy vs. docetaxel alone, which resulted in improved PFS (4.1 vs. 2.8 months) and higher response rates (24.5% vs. 14%) but no OS benefit was achieved [523,524]. 7.7.3.3. Immunotherapy for platinum-pre-treated patients without previous immunotherapy The immune checkpoint inhibitors pembrolizumab, nivolumab, atezolizumab, avelumab, and durvalumab have demonstrated similar efficacy and safety in patients progressing during, or after, previous platinum-based chemotherapy in phase I, II and III trials. Pembrolizumab demonstrated a significant OS Improvement as second-line treatment in a phase III RCT leading to EMA and FDA approval. Patients (n = 542) were randomised to receive either pembrolizumab monotherapy or chemotherapy (paclitaxel, docetaxel or vinflunine). The median OS with pembrolizumab was 10.3 months (95% CI: 8.0–11.8) vs. 7.4 months (95% CI: 6.1–8.3) with chemotherapy (HR 0.73, 95% CI: 0.59–0.91, p = 0.002) independent of PD-L1 expression levels [511,525]. Atezolizumab was the first checkpoint inhibitor approved by the FDA for metastatic UC based on the results of phase I and II trials [236,526], however, the indication has subsequently been withdrawn. The phase III RCT (IMvigor211) included 931 patients comparing atezolizumab with second-line chemotherapy (paclitaxel, docetaxel or vinflunine) did not meet its primary endpoint of improved OS for patients with high PD-L1 expression with 11.1 months (atezolizumab) vs. 10.6 (chemotherapy) months (stratified HR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.63–1.21, p = 0.41) [470]. The PD-1 inhibitor nivolumab was approved by the FDA based on the results of a single-arm phase II trial (CheckMate 275), enrolling 270 platinum pre-treated patients. The primary endpoint of ORR was 19.6%, and OS was 8.74 months for the entire group [527]. The TITAN-TCC study evaluated the safety and activity of nivolumab induction plus high-dose ipilumumab (3 mg/kg) boosts in non-responders (stable or progressive disease) in the second-line treatment of 83 patients with metatsatic UC. Fifty (60%) received at least one boost with an investigator-assessed response rate of 33% (CR: 7%), demonstrating promising outcomes with this strategy compared to the rate reported in CheckMate 275 [528]. 7.7.3.4. Side-effect profile of immunotherapy Checkpoint inhibitors including PD-1 or PD-L1 antibodies and CTLA-4 antibodies have a distinct side-effect profile associated with their mechanism of action leading to enhanced immune system activity. These AEs can affect any organ in the body leading to mild, moderate or severe side effects. The most common organs affected are the skin, GI tract, liver, lung, thyroid, adrenal and pituitary gland. Other systems that may be affected include musculoskeletal, renal, nervous, haematologic, ocular and cardiovascular system. Any change during immunotherapy treatment should raise suspicion about a possible relation to the treatment. The nature of immune-related AEs has been very well characterised and published [529]. The timely and appropriate treatment of immune-related side effects is crucial to achieve optimal benefit from the treatment while maintaining safety. Clear guidelines for side-effect management have been published [530]. Immunotherapy treatment should be applied and supervised by trained clinicians only to ensure early side effect recognition and treatment. In case of interruption of immunotherapy, re-challenge will require close monitoring for AEs [531]. 