7.7.8. Summary: treatment algorithm for metastatic urothelial cancer update 2024. Figure 7.2 summarises the treatment algorithm for metastatic BC based on the evidence discussed in the text above. Patients with treatment-naive mUC can be divided into two broad categories: eligible for combination therapies or ineligible for combination therapies. The distinction between the two groups is currently based on the eligibility criteria for the pivotal trial EV-302/KEYNOTE 39A. Criteria include ECOG performance status 0-2, GFR ≥30ml/min and adequate organ functions with eligibility for treatment with EV and Pembrolizumab. The combination of EV plus the checkpoint inhibitor pembrolizumab represents the new standard of care for patients who are deemed fit for combination therapies. In patients that might not be eligible for or refuse treatment with EV including patients with uncontrolled diabetes, peripheral neuropathy grade ≥2 and pre-existing significant skin disorders, platinum-based chemotherapy with integration of immune checkpoint inhibitors represents the preferred options. With regards to platinum-based chemotherapy, the definitions are grouped according to platinum-eligibility based on clear definitions. In platinum-based chemotherapy, cisplatin is to be preferred to carboplatin. Patients who are cisplatin-ineligible but carboplatin-eligible should receive gemcitabine- carboplatin combination chemotherapy. In case of positive PD-L1 status, treatment with checkpoint inhibitors (atezolizumab or pembrolizumab) could be an alternative option. Patients unfit for both cisplatin and carboplatin (platinum-unfit) can be considered for immunotherapy (FDA approved irrespective of PD-L1 status, EMA approved only for PD-L1 positive patients) or receive BSC. In cases of disease stabilization or better on platinum-based chemotherapy switch, maintenance treatment with IO (avelumab) is recommended. Alternatively, patients can be followed closely and receive second-line immunotherapy at the time of progression (pembrolizumab). It is recommended to determine FGFR mutation status before deciding about further-line treatment. Patients with FGFR3 mutations are candidates for FGFR inhibitor treatment. Enfortumab vedotin therapy is standard in case of progression after platinum chemotherapy and IO, however based on EV-302/KEYNOTE 39A, the majority of patients will be candidates for EV plus pembrolizumab in the first-line setting. The optimal sequence of novel agents and potential combinations are the subject of many ongoing trials. It is generally recommended to treat patients within ongoing clinical trials whenever possible. 