4.5.7.1. Intra-sphincteric botulinum toxin injection. Botulinum toxin inhibits the presynaptic release of acetylcholine, which reduces urethral sphincter tone. It is also believed to decrease the release of noradrenaline in the urethra to counteract external urethral sphincter overactivity [554]. Evidence on the use of botulinum toxin for female BOO is limited to small case series. Most studies included mixed populations without subgroup analyses, or the diagnosis of voiding dysfunction could not be ascertained as solely resulting from BOO. No comparative trial exclusively involving female BOO patients using botulinum toxin has been identified in the literature. A SR including several reports of small case series using variable doses of onabotulinumtoxinA injected periurethrally in women with dysfunctional voiding showed improvements in symptoms, and reductions in residual volume and voiding detrusor pressure. Larger series in adults (both sexes) showed success rates of 86–100% [554]. A double-blind, placebo-controlled RCT (n = 73) resulted in significantly lower IPSS score and larger voided volume after 100 U onabotulinumtoxinA compared with saline in 31 men and women with dysfunctional voiding. Dysfunctional voiding was defined by a spinning top appearance on real-time fluoroscopy, poorly relaxed urethral sphincter on EMG, and a normal-to-high voiding pressure with a low and/or intermittent urinary flow rate, a PVR volume > 300 mL, and a low voiding efficiency. Other urodynamic parameters were comparable between the groups [555]. A subgroup analysis on the female population of this study was not available. Two small case series in women with BOO reported the effects of intrasphincter 100 U onabotulinumtoxinA. Both showed improvement in symptom and bother scores and significant reduction in PVR volume [513,556]. One study reported increased Qmax and improved static urethral pressure profile (UPP) [513]. The average symptom-free duration was 16.8 weeks in another study [556]. Adverse events included UTI and temporary need for CISC. No SUI was reported. 