4.5.7.6. Bladder neck incision/resection. Transurethral bladder neck incision decreases resistance at the bladder neck by cutting open the hypertrophic bladder neck smooth muscle in patients with primary bladder neck obstruction. Transurethral incision of the bladder neck may be performed with a unilateral incision at the twelve o’clock position or with bilateral incisions at the five and seven o'clock, two and ten o'clock or three and nine o’clock positions, or four incisions at the three, six, nine and twelve o’clock positions. This may be done using a resectoscope with a Collin’s knife, cold knife, or using laser energy. Some authors report additional resection of the bladder neck between the five and seven o’clock positions. A review of non-comparative studies on bladder neck incision for the treatment of bladder neck obstruction in women reports success rates of 76–100% [512]. Bladder neck incision was compared with V-Y-reconstruction using Nesbit’s technique in a retrospective study of seventeen women with BOO, diagnosed by various uroradiological, endoscopic and urodynamic investigations. The results showed similar symptomatic improvement rates and postoperative PVR volume between the two groups. V-Y plasty had a longer operating and catheter time, lower uroradiological improvement rate, higher transfusion rate, and higher adverse event rate [566]. Several prospective case series consistently reported significant improvements in IPSS, QoL, Qmax, PdetQmax and PVR volume after treatment compared to baseline, regardless of the site of the incision, type of energy used or the length of follow-up [567-570]. The largest case series with 84 patients diagnosed with primary bladder neck obstruction (based on lack of funnel shape of the bladder neck during voiding-on-voiding cysto-urethrography, Pdet > 20 cm H2O and Qmax < 12 mL/s) showed success in 84.5% of patients with improvement in IPSS, QoL, Qmax and PdetQmax after mean follow-up of 27.4 months (6–78 months). Complications included vesico-vaginal fistula (VVF) (3.6%), SUI (4.7%) and urethral stricture (3.6%) [567]. No comparisons have been made between the different incision techniques (location, length, and depth of incision, implement used – cold knife vs. hot knife vs. laser, with or without resection). However, in a case series of 84 patients, complications of VVF and SUI were noted in the cohort of patients who had their incisions at five and seven o’clock positions, and not in those who had their incisions at two and ten o’clock [567]. Adverse events include SUI, requirement for reoperation, and recurrence. Postoperative SUI was reported in 3– 33% [512]. 