4.5.7.4. Urethral dilatation. Urethral dilation involves the passage of sequentially greater diameter dilators into the urethra, causing the obstructing fibrotic tissue to break open, thereby widening the lumen. It is considered the primary procedure of choice for women suspected of urethral stricture disease [527]. Dilation of up to 30–40 Fr has been done. There is no standard dilatation technique; dilatation of up to 43 Fr has been described, although other authors suggest dilating to 30 or 35 Fr. A systematic review of female urethral stricture management included three trials involving urethral dilatation. Pooled analysis of data from 93 women showed a mean success rate of 49% after urethral dilation to 41 Fr with a mean follow-up of 46 months. Mean time to failure was 12 months. In treatment-naïve patients, success rate (as defined by trialists) was 58%, compared with 27.2% in patients who had undergone previous dilatation [561]. An RCT of 50 women with OAB syndrome and associated urodynamically confirmed BOO (defined as aQmax < 15 mL/s with a voided volume of > 100 mL and/or PVR volume > 200 mL, not due to urethral stricture) compared the effect of cystoscopy and bladder distension with urethral dilatation (n = 22) and cystoscopy only (n = 28) after six weeks’ follow-up. Significantly more patients who had cystoscopy only had persistent urgency at six weeks and six months postoperatively. Urodynamic parameters did not significantly change pre- and postoperatively in both groups. The greater improvement in QoL scores based on the King’s Health Questionnaire domain scores seen in the non-urethral dilatation group in this trial should be interpreted cautiously because of the higher baseline scores. There were no significant changes in Qmax, PVR volume, voided volume or PdetQmax in any of the two groups at six weeks’ questioning the role of any of these two options for therapeutic management of BOO. Also, six patients (12%) developed postoperative SUI [562]. A prospective trial of 86 women with primary urethral stricture compared on-demand vs. intermittent urethral dilatation to 24 Fr every two months. It showed an overall increase in Qmax and decrease in PVR volume post-dilatation. Significantly greater improvements were seen in the intermittent urethral dilatation group [563]. Worsening or new-onset SUI is a concern with urethral dilatation, but it is less of a concern than after urethrotomy or surgical reconstruction. Patients have also reported frequency and urgency post-dilatation [564]. 