5.4. Diagnostic evaluation (basic work-up). 5.4.1. Medical and sexual history The first step in evaluating ED is always a detailed medical and sexual history of patients and, when available, their partners [303]. Figure 2 lists the minimal diagnostic evaluation (basic work-up) in patients with ED. A detailed description should be made of the rigidity and duration of both sexually-stimulated and morning erections and problems with sexual desire, arousal, ejaculation, and orgasm [304-306]. Validated psychometric questionnaires, such as the IIEF [307] or its short version (i.e., Sexual Health Inventory for Men; SHIM) [308], help to assess the different sexual function domains (i.e. sexual desire, EF, orgasmic function, intercourse satisfaction, and overall satisfaction), as well as the potential impact of a specific treatment modality. Similarly, structured interviews allow the identification and quantification of the different underlying factors affecting EF [309]. Psychometric analyses also support the use of the Erectile Hardness Score (EHS) for the assessment of penile rigidity in practice and clinical trials research [310].Patients should always be screened for symptoms of possible hypogonadism, including decreased libido and energy, and fatigue (see Table 3: Specific symptoms associated with LOH). 5.4.2. Physical examination Every patient must be given a physical examination focused on the genitourinary, endocrine, vascular and neurological systems [311,312]. A physical examination may reveal unsuspected diagnoses, such as Peyronie’s disease (PD), pre-malignant or malignant genital lesions, prostatic enlargement or irregularity/nodularity, or signs and symptoms suggestive of hypogonadism (see Table 3: Specific symptoms associated with LOH). Blood pressure and heart rate should be measured if they have not been assessed in the previous three to six months. Likewise, either BMI calculation or waist circumference measurement should be undertaken to assess patients for comorbid conditions (e.g., MetS). 5.4.3. Laboratory testing Patients should undergo a fasting blood glucose or haemoglobin A1c and lipid profile measurement if they have not been assessed in the previous twelve months. Hormonal tests should include early morning total testosterone in a fasting state. The bio-available or calculated fT values may sometimes be needed to corroborate total testosterone measurements (see sections 3.2.1 and 3.4.1). Additional laboratory tests may be considered in selected patients with specific signs and associated symptoms (e.g., total PSA) [313], PRL and LH [314]). Although physical examination and laboratory evaluation of most men with ED may not reveal the exact diagnosis, clinical and biochemical evaluation presents an opportunity to identify comorbid conditions [312]. Figure 2: Minimal diagnostic evaluation (basic work-up) in patients with ED ED = erectile dysfunction; IIEF = International Index of Erectile Function. 5.4.4. Cardiovascular system and sexual activity: the patient at risk Patients who seek treatment for sexual dysfunction have a high prevalence of CVDs. Overall, ED can improve the sensitivity of screening for asymptomatic CVD in men with diabetes [315,316]. Erectile dysfunction significantly increases the risk of CVD, coronary heart disease, stroke and atrial fibrillation [317]. Longitudinal data from an observational population-based study of 965 men without CVD showed that younger men (especially those < 50 years) with transient and persistent ED have an increased Framingham CVD risk [318]. The current EAU Guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of men with ED have been adapted from the recommendations from the Princeton Consensus conferences on sexual dysfunction and cardiac risk published in 2012 [319]. Over time, the Princeton Consensus (Expert Panel) Conference is dedicated to optimising sexual function and preserving cardiovascular health [319-322]. Accordingly, patients with ED have been stratified into three cardiovascular risk categories (Table 8), which can still be used as the basis for a treatment algorithm for initiating or resuming sexual activity (Figure 3): low-risk patients do not need cardiac testing or evaluation before initiation or resumption of sexual activity or therapy for sexual dysfunction; intermediate risk patients, according to the results of testing, may be moved to either the high- or low-risk group; high-risk individuals should be referred for cardiac assessment and treatment. Sexual activity should be stopped until the patient’s cardiac condition has been stabilised by treatment. Table 8: Cardiac risk stratification (based on 2nd and 3rd Princeton Consensus) [319, 322]  Low-risk categoryIntermediate-risk categoryHigh-risk categoryAsymptomatic, < 3 risk factors forCAD (excluding sex)> 3 risk factors for CAD (excluding sex)High-risk arrhythmiasMild, stable angina(evaluated and/or being treated)Moderate, stable anginaUnstable or refractory anginaUncomplicated previous MIRecent MI (> 2, < 6 weeks)Recent MI (< 2 weeks)LVD/CHF (NYHA class I or II)LVD/CHF (NYHA class III)LVD/CHF (NYHA class IV)Post-successful coronary revascularisationNon-cardiac sequelae of atherosclerotic disease (e.g., stroke, peripheral vascular disease)Hypertrophic obstructive and other cardiomyopathiesControlled hypertensionUncontrolled hypertensionMild valvular diseaseModerate-to-severe valvular disease CAD = coronary artery disease; CHF = congestive heart failure; LVD = left ventricular dysfunction; MI = myocardial infarction; NYHA = New York Heart Association. Figure 3: Treatment algorithm for determining level of sexual activity according to cardiac risk in ED (based on 3rd Princeton Consensus)  [319]a Sexual activity is equivalent to walking 1 mile on the flat in 20 minutes or briskly climbing two flights of stairs in 10 seconds.b Sexual activity is equivalent to 4 minutes of the Bruce treadmill protocol. 