5.5. Diagnostic Evaluation (advanced work-up). Most patients with ED can be managed based on their medical and sexual history; conversely, some patients may need specific diagnostic tests (Table 9). 5.5.1. Nocturnal penile tumescence and rigidity test The nocturnal penile tumescence and rigidity (NPTR) test applies nocturnal monitoring devices that measure the number of erectile episodes, tumescence (circumference change by strain gauges), maximal penile rigidity, and duration of nocturnal erections. The NPTR assessment should be performed on at least two separate nights. A functional erectile mechanism is indicated by an erectile event of at least 60% rigidity recorded on the tip of the penis that lasts for ≥ 10 minutes [323]. Nocturnal penile tumescence and rigidity monitoring is an approach for objectively differentiating between organic and psychogenic ED (patients with psychogenic ED usually have normal findings in the NPTR test). However, many potential confounding factors (e.g., situational) may limit its routine use for diagnostic purposes [324]. 5.5.2. Intracavernous injection test The intracavernous injection test gives limited information about vascular status. A positive test is a rigid erectile response (unable to bend the penis) that appears within 10 minutes after the intracavernous injection and lasts for 30 minutes [325]. Overall, the test per se is inconclusive as a diagnostic procedure and a duplex Doppler study of the penis should be requested, if clinically warranted. 5.5.3. Dynamic duplex ultrasound of the penis Dynamic duplex ultrasound (US) of the penis is a second-level diagnostic test that specifically studies the haemodynamic pathophysiology of EF. Therefore, in clinical practice, it is usually applied in those conditions in which a potential vasculogenic aetiology of ED (e.g., diabetes mellitus, multiple concomitant CV risk factors and/or overt peripheral vascular disease, renal transplantation and poor responders to oral therapy) is suspected. Peak systolic blood flow > 30 cm/s, end-diastolic velocity < 3 cm/s and resistance index > 0.8 are considered normal [326,327]. Recent data suggest that duplex scanning as a haemodynamic study may be better at tailoring therapy for ED, such as for low-intensity shock wave treatment (Li-SWT) in men with vasculogenic ED [328]. Further vascular investigation is unnecessary if a duplex US examination is normal. 5.5.4. Arteriography and dynamic infusion cavernosometry or cavernosography Pudendal arteriography should be performed only in patients who are being considered for penile revascularisation [329]. At present, dynamic infusion cavernosometry or cavernosography are rarely employed as diagnostic methods for evaluating venogenic ED, and there has been concern surrounding the concept of venogenic ED. 5.5.5. Psychopathological and psychosocial assessment Mental health issues and psychological distress are frequently comorbid with ED [330]. This is most evident for depression and anxiety-related disorders, but may also include transitory states of altered mood (i.e., dysfunctional affective states resulting from a specific life stressor or crisis) [264,331,332]. Relationship factors, including lack of satisfaction with the partner, poor sexual relationships, length of the relationship, or feeling emotionally disconnected from the partner during sex, have been related to erectile difficulties and dysfunction [331,333,334]. In contrast, intimacy was found to be a protective factor in ED [253,335]. Additionally, the cognitive factors underpinning organic and non-organic ED (i.e., all dysfunctional thinking styles and expectations about sexuality, poor self-esteem and cognitive distraction from erotic cues) must also be assessed. Psychosexual assessment in ED cases includes a clinical interview considering all the previoustopics [336]. Also, self-reported measures are frequently used within the psychosocial context [337].A growing amount of data suggests that men who have sex with men (MSM) present specific psychological risks associated with erectile capability regarding anal sex [338]. Therefore, professionals must tailor their assessment in the context of sexual minorities. Figure 4: Psychopathological and psychosocial assessment    Table 9: Indications for specific diagnostic tests for ED and the specific diagnostic tests Indications for specific diagnostic tests for EDPrimary ED (not caused by acquired organic disease or psychogenic disorder).Young patients with a history of pelvic or perineal trauma, who could benefit from potentially curative revascularisation surgery or angioplasty.Patients with penile deformities that might require surgical correction (e.g., Peyronie’s disease and congenital penile curvature).Patients with complex psychiatric or psychosexual disorders.Patients with complex endocrine disorders.Specific tests may be indicated at the request of the patient or their partner.Medico-legal reasons (e.g., implantation of penile prosthesis to document end-stage ED, and sexual abuse).Specific diagnostic tests for EDNocturnal Penile Tumescence and Rigidity (NTPR) using Rigiscan®Vascular studiesIntracavernous vasoactive drug injectionPenile dynamic duplex ultrasonographyPenile dynamic infusion cavernosometry and cavernosographyInternal pudendal arteriographySpecialised endocrinological studiesSpecialised psycho-diagnostic evaluation 5.5.6. Summary of evidence and recommendations for diagnostic evaluation of ED Summary of evidenceLEMedical and sexual history, physical examination and laboratory testing including metabolic and hormonal profile may identify risk factors for ED and may help in defining the ED aetiology.3Validated psychometric questionnaires (e.g. IIEF; EHS) are reliable tools to assess ED severity.3Specific diagnostic tests could be of help in discerning between vasculogenic, hormonal or psychogenic causes of ED.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingTake a comprehensive medical and sexual history in every patient presenting with erectile dysfunction (ED). Take a targeted psychosexual history, including life stressors, cultural aspects, and cognitive factors regarding patient sexual performance.StrongUse a validated questionnaire related to ED to assess all sexual function domains (e.g., International Index of Erectile Function) and the effect of a specific treatment modality.StrongInclude a focused physical examination in the initial assessment of men with ED to identify underlying medical conditions and comorbid genital disorders that may be associated with ED.StrongEvaluate laboratory tests, including glucose and lipid profile and total testosterone, to identify and treat any reversible risk factors and lifestyle factors that can be modified.StrongInclude specific diagnostic tests in the initial evaluation of ED in the presence of the conditions presented in Table 9.Strong 