4.5.4. Diagnostic evaluation. Diagnosis of BOO in women, although dependent on formal pressure–flow studies, may be suggested by several clinical and other non-invasive assessments. 4.5.4.1. Clinical history In terms of clinical history, a range of LUTS may be elicited and these may not be confined to voiding LUTS. Women may not present until they have the possible complications of BOO, such as recurrent UTI, chronic urinary retention or acute/chronic kidney disease [504]. The evidence regarding clinical utility of symptoms for the diagnosis of BOO is inconclusive and limited to small retrospective studies [516,517]. Perhaps some of the difficulty in evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of urinary symptoms comes from the observation that a significant proportion of women presenting with obstruction also have concomitant storage symptoms, making urodynamic evaluation essential. In a large study of > 5,000 women with urinary symptoms including 163 with BOO, additional urodynamic diagnoses were noted in 54% [518]. 4.5.4.2. Clinical examination There are no studies evaluating the clinical utility of physical examination in women with suspected BOO; nevertheless, it is widely considered as a key part of the medical assessment. It allows for visual inspection of the urethra and vagina for possible causes of mechanical obstruction as well as an assessment of the pelvic floor, which may be the cause of functional obstruction. 4.5.4.3. Uroflowmetry and post-void residual volume Reduced Qmax and incomplete bladder emptying can result from weakness in the contractile strength of the detrusor muscle, or increased outlet resistance due to functional or anatomical/mechanical BOO. The use of uroflowmetry to differentiate between anatomical and functional BOO was explored in a retrospective study of 157 women [511], which concluded that Qmax was significantly lower in patients with anatomical obstruction, but a large degree of overlap was noted. The largest evaluation of the diagnostic utility of urine flow studies and PVR volume estimation was a retrospective analysis of > 1,900 patients with symptoms of voiding dysfunction, of whom > 800 were diagnosed with BOO based on urodynamic assessment [519]. Functional BOO was > 6times more common than anatomical/mechanical obstruction, which does not agree with most of the other epidemiological literature for female BOO. The authors found that although urine flow rate alone was not accurate enough to diagnose BOO, PVR of > 200 mL could differentiate bladder neck dysfunction from the other causes of BOO, with a receiver-operator characteristics (ROC) area under the curve (AUC) of 0.69. Conversely, in a retrospective study involving 101 women primarily presenting with SUI, a good correlation between abnormal uroflowmetry and urodynamic obstruction (phi = 0.718) was found [520]. 4.5.4.4. Ultrasound The major utility of US scanning in women with BOO is to detect possible complications such as BWT/DWT upper tract dilatation/hydronephrosis. However, the diagnostic capabilities of US have been investigated in a 2021 SR of 16 non-randomised studies and reported a moderate pooled sensitivity and high specificity for DWT, while 6 studies evaluating US-estimated bladder weight (UEBW) reported a high sensitivity and specificity [521]. A prospective case–control study of 27 patients with cystoscopically confirmed bladder neck obstruction [522] reported the diagnostic value of shear wave elastography (SWE) and acoustic radiation force impulse imaging (ARFI) for female BOO was compared and the authors concluded that ARFI was more accurate than SWE, but a combination of the techniques was superior to either one alone. 4.5.4.5. Magnetic resonance imaging Magnetic resonance imaging in patients with pathological urethral stricture can determine the degree of peri-urethral fibrosis, although the prognostic and clinical significance of such a finding has not been established [523]. 4.5.4.6. Electromyography Electromyography (EMG) has been most extensively studied in the subgroup of women with BOO due to idiopathic urinary retention caused by a high-tone non-relaxing sphincter (Fowler’s syndrome). Abnormal urethral EMG activity may be associated with non-relaxation of the striated sphincter, abnormally high urethral pressure, and, through an exaggerated guarding reflex, poor bladder sensation and reduced detrusor contractile strength [513,524]. Complex repetitive discharges and decelerating bursts are specific urethral EMG abnormalities that have been described in patients with high-tone non-relaxing sphincter, although these abnormalities have also been noted in asymptomatic volunteers [525,526]. A review of voiding dysfunction in women included 65 studies with only a small number addressing the diagnostic utility of PFM EMG [462]. The authors commented that increased EMG activity of the PFM can be seen during voiding or non-relaxation, and when this is coupled with pressure–flow information from urodynamics, it may be useful to differentiate between functional and anatomical obstruction. Further evidence for this comes from a retrospective study of 157 women with roughly equal numbers of women with functional and anatomical obstruction, which concluded that a low level of PFM EMG activity is characteristic of anatomical obstruction [511]. Additional neurophysiological tests, such as anal sphincter EMG, bulbocavernosus reflex, and pudendal sensory evoked potentials can assess the integrity of the somatic S2–4 nerve roots; however, their clinical utility in the context of non-neurogenic female BOO needs to be better defined [513]. 4.5.4.7. Cystourethroscopy Cystourethroscopy can be useful to visualise any anatomical/mechanical obstruction and provide information regarding its nature, location and calibre. Given that pelvic malignancy may cause anatomical BOO, cystourethroscopy is considered an essential part of the diagnostic pathway. Formal urethral calibration may be useful for women with BOO secondary to pathological urethral stricture and various different urethral calibre thresholds have been used, from 14-20 Fr [527]. 4.5.4.8. Urodynamics and video-urodynamics Pressure–flow studies are the mainstay of BOO diagnosis and the characteristic abnormalities are a combination of low flow and concomitant high detrusor pressure [512]. However, while the general definition of BOO is well established, with some data supporting its clinical validity in male patients [528], the urodynamic definition of female BOO remains controversial [509]. Several urodynamic criteria have been introduced but none has been established as a standard due to lack of clinical validation [509,529]. The Blaivas-Groutz nomogram, which plots free Qmax and maximum detrusor pressure (Pdet.max) measured during urodynamic studies, is one of the most popular [530] but has been suggested to overestimate obstruction [531]. The addition of fluoroscopic imaging suggested by Nitti and colleagues introduces a video-urodynamic criterion for obstruction [76]. However, both methods lack data supporting their clinical validity, especially regarding their predictive value for therapeutic intervention outcomes [74]. In a large retrospective study of 1,914 patients, 810 of whom were diagnosed with BOO, several urodynamic cut-off values were determined by ROC curve analysis to optimise the diagnostic accuracy of video-urodynamic studies [519]: PdetQmax > 30 cm H2O for differentiating BOO from bladder dysfunction and normal studies(ROC AUC = 0.78);the Abrams-Griffiths number > 30 for differentiating anatomical from functional BOO (ROC AUC = 0.66);PdetQmax > 30 cm H2O for differentiating dysfunctional voiding from poor relaxation of the external sphincter (ROC AUC = 0.93). More recently, Solomon and Greenwell devised a female BOO nomogram that parallels the ICS nomogram used for male BOO [532]. It allows the calculation of an alternative BOO female index (BOOIf), using a formula closely aligned to its male counterpart: BOOIf = PdetQmax-2.2Qmax. It is interpreted with a different algorithm however: BOOIf < 0: < 10% probability of obstruction;5 < BOOIf < 18: equivocal, > 50% likelihood of obstruction;BOOIf > 18: 90% likelihood of obstruction. The Solomon–Greenwell nomogram was the first to be tested for clinical validity. In a recent series of 21 unselected consecutive women treated for BOO, the authors observed significant improvement of all urodynamic parameters (Qmax, PdetQmax and BOOIf) in female patients who became asymptomatic postoperatively [533]. An alternative urodynamic parameter of area under the detrusor pressure curve during voiding (corrected for voided volume) has been proposed following a prospective study of 103 women [534]. The authors concluded that this variable appears to be the most discriminating urodynamic parameter for the diagnosis of female BOO. This suggested diagnostic method has not been independently validated. Voiding cystourethrography (VCUG) alone or in conjunction with concomitant pressure–flow studies may be useful in delineating the site of obstruction. Characteristic features include: radiographic evidence of obstruction between the bladder neck and distal urethra in the presence of sustained detrusor contraction [76];lack of funnelling appearance of the bladder neck/tight bladder neck in primary bladder neck obstruction;proximal dilatation of the urethra with distal narrowing in women with urethral stricture disease or pelvic-floor hypertonicity. IIt is not uncommon for women with voiding dysfunction, specifically functional BOO, to be unable to provide a flow during (video)urodynamic testing. Failure to relax the PFM can enhance the guarding reflex, limiting detrusor contractility. 4.5.4.9. Summary of evidence and recommendations for diagnosis of bladder outlet obstruction Summary of evidenceLEEvaluation of LUTS by history and examination alone is insufficient to accurately diagnose female BOO.3Urine flow studies cannot accurately diagnose BOO in women.3Ultrasound scanning is unable to accurately diagnose BOO in women.2bElectromyography alone is unable to accurately diagnose BOO in women, although it may be of use in combination with pressure–flow studies and in differentiation of anatomical vs. functional BOO.3Cystourethroscopy can be useful to visualise any anatomical/mechanical obstruction and provide information regarding its nature, location, and calibre.4Urodynamics (often combined with video-fluoroscopy) is the standard test for evaluating female BOO.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingTake a full clinical history and perform a thorough clinical examination in women with suspected bladder outlet obstruction (BOO).StrongDo not rely on measurements from urine flow studies alone to diagnose female BOO.StrongPerform cysto-urethroscopy in women with suspected anatomical BOO.StrongPerform urodynamic evaluation in women with suspected BOO.Strong 