4.5.5. Disease management. Therapeutic interventions for BOO aim to decrease outlet resistance in order to increase urinary flow, improve bladder emptying and thus reduce voiding and storage LUTS [74,509,529]. Treatment choice is commonly dictated by the underlying cause of the obstruction. 4.5.5.1. Conservative management 4.5.5.1.1. Behavioural modification Behavioural modification interventions are often tailored to individual patients’ needs, symptoms and circumstances and can include elements such as education regarding normal voiding function, self-monitoring of symptoms, changes in lifestyle factors that may affect symptoms, avoidance of constipation, and alteration of voiding technique. Ultimately, techniques aim to improve the coordination between the detrusor and sphincter, resulting in their synergistic action [74,509,529]. These individual components of self-management have not been evaluated separately and most recommendations are derived from consensus methodology. They may help reduce symptoms resulting from BOO but no quantification of their effect is possible. 4.5.5.1.2. Pelvic floor muscle training +/- biofeedback In the context of BOO, physiotherapy aims to teach patients to relax their PFMs and striated urethral sphincter during voiding. Pelvic floor muscle contraction, particularly in women with pelvic floor dysfunction, has been shown to significantly reduce vaginal resting pressure and surface EMG activity [480]. As mentioned in the section discussing UAB (Section 4.4.4.1.2), most of the evidence supporting PFMT in dysfunctional voiding is from paediatric studies. 4.5.5.1.3. Electrical stimulation Application of electrodes that allow for controlled contraction and relaxation of the PFMs may theoretically facilitate the relaxation of the external sphincter and pelvic floor but no critical evaluation of this intervention in women with BOO has been published. 4.5.5.1.4. Use of vaginal pessary Intravaginal devices such as pessaries aim to relieve voiding symptoms and improve bladder emptying by physical correction of the obstruction caused by a POP. In a prospective study of eighteen women with grade three or four cystocoeles and diagnosed with BOO by urodynamics (defined as PdetQmax > 25 cm H2O, Qmax < 15 mL/s), normal voiding was noted in seventeen (94%) immediately after placement of a vaginal pessary. No other outcomes were available in this series [535]. No long-term data are available on the use of vaginal pessary for BOO. 4.5.5.1.5. Urinary containment The use of containment devices in BOO is to achieve social continence in patients with urinary retention and associated overflow UI and is often only a temporary measure. There are no published studies on the outcomes or adverse events associated with the use of urinary containment devices for the management of female BOO, though there are many involving women with UI who may have BOO as an underlying cause. 4.5.5.1.6. Urinary catheterisation Significant urinary retention from BOO may be addressed by actively bypassing the obstruction and draining the residual urine. Catheterisation may be used as a treatment itself or as an adjunct to an initial treatment of urethral dilatation or urethrotomy or bladder neck incision. There are two ways of using a catheter: CISC or indwelling catheterisation [117]. After UI surgery, BOO may be managed by short-term catheterisation in most patients who have transient postoperative voiding difficulty. For a few women who develop chronic urinary retention, CISC or indwelling catheterisation may be offered [462]. A small RCT investigated the effectiveness of CISC to prevent recurrence after internal optical urethrotomy for urethral stricture disease. In the treatment group, CISC was done twice a day for one week, and once a day for four weeks, then once weekly for seven weeks post-urethrotomy. Freedom from stricture recurrence, determined by urethrography and uroflowmetry performed twelve weeks postoperatively, was higher in the catheterisation group compared to the group with no catheterisation (78.5% vs. 55.4%) [536]. This finding mirrors the Cochrane review on self-dilatation for urethral stricture among men that showed less recurrence with the performance of self-dilatation [537]. In a series of 20 patients with voiding dysfunction after TVT who were put on a CISC programme, overall cure rate was 59%, with cure defined as consistent residual volume < 100 mL. Half of these patients were voiding normally within twelve weeks [538]. See Section 4.4.4.1.3 for further evidence related to CISC. 4.5.5.1.7. Intraurethral inserts An intraurethral insert is a short silicone catheter containing an internal valve and pump mechanism positioned in the female urethra. The valve-pump mechanism is operated by an external control unit, which activates to open the valve and the pump to draw urine from the bladder and allow voiding. At the end of urination, the pump ceases and the valve closes to regain continence. The insert is routinely replaced once a month. One study reported the use of this device in 92 women with voiding dysfunction of various aetiologies including multiple sclerosis, prior pelvic surgery, pelvic radiation, diabetes mellitus, spinal stenosis and injury. The device was removed within seven days of insertion in 60% of the cases due to discomfort, peri-catheter leakage or technical difficulty. An additional 20% of patients had late discontinuation. All those who continued to use the device were satisfied, with PVR volumes remaining < 100 mL. Adverse events included migration into the bladder in six cases and symptomatic UTI in four cases [539,540]. Extended, long-term data on the use of urethral inserts are not available. 4.5.5.1.8. Extracorporeal magnetic stimulation Extracorporeal magnetic stimulation involves the patient sitting on a device that induces consistent PFM contraction and relaxation at a set frequency and interval by repeated magnetic stimulation of motor nerve fibres. It is postulated that patients therefore learn to spontaneously contract or relax the PFM, which may enhance their ability to relax their pelvic floor while voiding [541]. In a small (n = 60) prospective non-randomised trial, alfuzosin was compared to EMS and to the combination of alfuzosin + EMS in women with functional BOO. They observed significant increase of Qmax and significant decrease of International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) in all groups and significantly greater improvement in the QoL question of the IPSS in the combination therapy group [541]. 4.5.5.1.9. Summary of evidence and recommendations for conservative treatment of bladder outlet obstruction Summary of evidenceLEPelvic floor muscle relaxation training with biofeedback may result in relaxation of the pelvic muscles and external urethra in women with dysfunctional voiding.3There is no available evidence in the published literature on the clinical effect of ES for management of female BOO.NAIn women with large (grade three or four) cystocoeles causing BOO, placement of a vaginal pessary may improve voiding efficiency.3Regular CISC after urethrotomy is better than no catheterisation to prevent recurrence of urethral strictures.1bA CISC programme in women with voiding dysfunction after TVT has a cure rate of 59%.3Women who use an intraurethral device have lower PVR volume, but most require its removal due to complications.3Extracorporeal magnetic stimulation combined with alfuzosin may be more effective than either of these therapies alone in women with functional BOO.2a RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) aimed at pelvic floor muscle relaxation to women with functional bladder outlet obstruction (BOO).WeakPrioritise research that investigates and advances understanding of the mechanisms and impact of PFMT on the coordinated relaxation of the pelvic floor during voiding.StrongOffer the use of a vaginal pessary to women with grade three or four cystocoeles and BOO who are not eligible/inclined towards other treatment options.WeakOffer urinary containment devices to women with BOO to address urinary leakage as a result of BOO, but not as a treatment to correct the condition.WeakOffer clean intermittent self-dilatation to women with urethral strictures or post-urinary incontinence surgery for BOO.WeakDo not offer an intraurethral device to women with BOO.Strong 