3.16.1. General Principles. 3.16.1.1. Definition of infectious complications The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and the CDC have both presented similar definitions recommended for the evaluation of infectious complications [517,518]. 3.16.1.2. Non-antibiotic measures for asepsis There are a number of non-antibiotic measures designed to reduce the risk of surgical site infection (SSI), many are historically part of the routine of surgery. The effectiveness of measures tested by RCTs are summarised in systematic reviews conducted by the Cochrane Wounds Group (http://wounds.cochrane.org/news/reviews). Urological surgeons and the institutions in which they work should consider and monitor maintenance of an aseptic environment to reduce risk of infection from pathogens within patients (microbiome) and from outside the patient (nosocomial/healthcare-associated). This should include use of correct methods of instrument cleaning and sterilisation, frequent and thorough cleaning of operating rooms and recovery areas and thorough disinfection of any contamination. The surgical team should prepare to perform surgery by effective hand washing [519], donning of appropriate protective clothing and maintenance of asepsis. These measures should continue as required in recovery and ward areas. Patients should be encouraged to shower pre-operatively, but use of chlorhexidine soap does not appear to be beneficial [520]. Although evidence quality is low, any required hair removal appears best done by clipping, rather than shaving, just prior to incision [521]. Mechanical bowel preparation should not be used as evidence review suggests harm not benefit [522,523]. There is some weak evidence that skin preparation using alcoholic solutions or chlorhexidine result in a lower rate of SSI than iodine solutions [524]. Studies on the use of plastic adherent drapes showed no evidence of benefit in reducing SSI [525]. 3.16.1.3. Detection of bacteriuria prior to urological procedures Identifying bacteriuria prior to diagnostic and therapeutic procedures aims to reduce the risk of infectious complications by controlling any pre-operative detected bacteriuria and to optimise antimicrobial coverage in conjunction with the procedure. A systematic review of the evidence identified eighteen studies comparing the diagnostic accuracy of different index tests (dipstick, automated microscopy, dipslide culture and flow cytometry), with urine culture as the reference standard [526]. The systematic review concluded that none of the alternative urinary investigations for the diagnosis of bacteriuria in adult patients prior to urological interventions can currently be recommended as an alternative to urine culture [526]. 3.16.1.4. Choice of agent Urologists should have knowledge of local pathogen prevalence for each type of procedure, their antibiotic susceptibility profiles and virulence in order to establish written local guidelines. These guidelines should cover the five modalities identified by the ECDC following a systematic review of the literature [527]. The agent should ideally not be one that may be required for treatment of infection. When risk of skin wound infection is low or absent, an aminoglycoside (gentamicin) should provide cover against likely uropathogens provided the eGFR is > 20 mL/min; second generation cephalosporins are an alternative [528]. Recent urine culture results including presence of any multi-resistant organisms, drug allergy, history of C. difficile associated diarrhoea, recent antibiotic exposure, evidence of symptomatic infection pre-procedure and serum creatinine should be checked. The panel have decided not to make recommendations for specific agents for particular procedures as there is considerable variation in Europe and worldwide regarding bacterial pathogens, their susceptibility and availability of antibiotic agents. 