3.16.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for peri-procedural antibiotic prophylaxis. Summary of evidenceLEThe outcome of clinical UTI was reported in four out of eleven RCTs with no benefit found for antibiotic prophylaxis vs. placebo in patients following filling and voiding cystometry.1bA meta-analysis of five trials of moderate quality showed a benefit for using antibiotic prophylaxis for the reduction of symptomatic UTI in patients undergoing cystoscopy. However, this benefit was not seen if only the two trials with low risk of bias were used in the meta-analysis.1aTwo meta-analyses found no benefit for antibiotic prophylaxis following ESWL in terms of reducing the rate of post-procedural fever and bacteriuria or trial-defined infection in patients without bacteriuria.1aTwo meta-analyses found no evidence of benefit for antibiotic prophylaxis prior to ureteroscopy in reducing the rate of clinical UTI; however, the rate of bacteriuria was reduced.1aA meta-analysis of five RCTs demonstrated a moderate level of evidence that antibiotic prophylaxis was associated with a statistically significant reduction in the risk of post-procedural UTI following PNL.1aTwo RCTs concluded that a single dose of a suitable agent was adequate for prophylaxis against clinical infection after PNL.1bA systematic review of 39 RCTs concluded that antibiotic prophylaxis reduced the rate of infectious complications in men undergoing TURP.1bA systematic review of two RCTs found no benefit for antibiotic prophylaxis in patients undergoing TURB.1bA meta-analysis of eight studies including 1,596 patients showed significantly reduced infectious complications in patients undergoing transperineal biopsy as compared to transrectal biopsy.1aA meta-analysis of eight non-RCTS reported comparable rates of post-biopsy infections in patients undergoing transperineal biopsy irrespective if antibiotic prophylaxis was given or not.1aA meta-analysis of eleven RCTs including 2,237 men showed that use of a rectal povidone-iodine preparation before transrectal biopsy, in addition to antimicrobial prophylaxis, resulted in a significantly lower rate of infectious complications.1aA meta-analysis on eleven studies with 1,753 patients showed significantly reduced infections after transrectal biopsy when using antimicrobial prophylaxis as compared to placebo/control.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not use antibiotic prophylaxis to reduce the rate of symptomatic urinary infection following:urodynamics;cystoscopy;extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy.StrongUse antibiotic prophylaxis to reduce the rate of symptomatic urinary infection following ureteroscopy.WeakUse single dose antibiotic prophylaxis to reduce the rate of clinical urinary infection following percutaneous nephrolithotomy.StrongUse antibiotic prophylaxis to reduce infectious complications in men undergoing transurethral resection of the prostate.StrongUse antibiotic prophylaxis to reduce infectious complications in high-risk patients undergoing transurethral resection of the bladder.WeakPerform prostate biopsy using the transperineal approach due to the lower risk of infectious complications.StrongUse routine surgical disinfection of the perineal skin for transperineal biopsy.StrongUse rectal cleansing with povidone-iodine in men prior to transrectal prostate biopsy.StrongDo not use fluoroquinolones for prostate biopsy in line with the European Commission final decision on EMEA/H/A-31/1452.StrongUse either target prophylaxis based on rectal swab or stool culture; augmented prophylaxis (two or more different classes of antibiotics); or alternative antibiotics (e.g. fosfomycin trometamol*, cephalosporin, aminoglycoside) for antibiotic prophylaxis for transrectal biopsy.Weak *Of note the indication of fosfomycin trometamol for prostate biopsy has been withdrawn in Germany as themanufacturers did not submit the necessary pharmacokinetic data in support of this indication. Urologists are advised to check their local guidance in relation to the use of fosfomycin trometamol for prostate biopsy. Table 13: Suggested regimens for antimicrobial prophylaxis prior to urological procedures As stated in section 3.14.1.4 the panel has decided not to make recommendations for specific agents for particular procedures, those listed below represent possible choices only. Urologists should choose a specific antimicrobial based on their knowledge of local pathogen prevalence for each type of procedure, their antibiotic susceptibility profiles and virulence. ProcedureProphylaxis recommendedAntimicrobialUrodynamicsNoN/ACystoscopyNoExtracorporeal shockwave lithotripsyNoUreteroscopyYesTrimethoprimTrimethoprim-sulphamethoxazoleCephalosporin group 2 or 3Aminopenicillin plus a beta-lactamase inhibitorPercutaneous nephrolithotomyYes (single dose)Transurethral resection of the prostateYesTransurethral resection of the bladderYes, in patients who have a high risk of suffering post-operative sepsis.Transrectal prostate biopsyYes1. Targeted prophylaxis - based on rectal swab or stool culture.2. Augmented prophylaxis - two or more different classes of antibiotics*.2. Alternative antibioticsfosfomycin trometamol** (e.g. 3 g before and 3 g 24-48 hrs after biopsy)cephalosporin (e.g. ceftriaxone 1 g i.m.; cefixime 400 mg p.o. for 3 days starting 24 hrs before biopsy)aminoglycoside (e.g. gentamicin3mg/kg i.v.; amikacin 15mg/kg i.m.) * Note option 2 is against antibiotic stewardship programmes** Of note the indication of fosfomycin trometamol for prostate biopsy has been withdrawn in Germany as the manufacturers did not submit the necessary pharmacokinetic data in support of this indication. Urologists are advised to check their local guidance in relation to the use of fosfomycin trometamol for prostate biopsy. Figure 4: Prostate biopsy workflow to reduce infectious complications1. Two systematic reviews including non-RCTs and two RCTs describe comparable rates of post-biopsy infection in patients with and without antibiotic prophylaxis.2. Be informed about local antimicrobial resistance.3. Banned by European Commission due to side effects.4. Contradicts principles of Antimicrobial Stewardship.5. Fosfomycin trometamol (4 RCTs), cephalosporins (2 RCTs), aminoglycosides (2 RCTs).6. Only one RCT comparing targeted and augmented prophylaxis.7. Originally introduced to use alternative antibiotics in case of fluoroquinolone resistance.8. Various schemes: fluoroquinolone plus aminoglycoside (4 RCTs); and fluoroquinolone plus cephalosporin (1 RCT).9. Significantly inferior to targeted and augmented prophylaxis. GRADE Working Group grades of evidence. High certainty: (⊕⊕⊕⊕)very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect. Moderate certainty: (⊕⊕⊕○)moderately confident in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different. Low certainty: (⊕⊕○○) confidence in the effect estimate is limited: the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect. Very low certainty: (⊕○○○) very little confidence in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect. Figure reproduced from Pilatz et al.,   [573] with permission from Elsevier. *Of note the indication of fosfomycin trometamol for prostate biopsy has been withdrawn in Germany as the manufacturers did not submit the necessary pharmacokinetic data in support of this indication. Urologists are advised to check their local guidance in relation to the use of fosfomycin trometamol for prostate biopsy 