9.2. Diagnosis. 9.2.1. Medical history, physical examination and psychological assessment 9.2.1.1. Medical History The first step in the evaluation of short penis is a detailed medical history [1237]. Common causes of penile shortness should be screened and observed (e.g., history of phimosis, priapism, hypospadias/epispadias, penile trauma, penile cancer, prostate cancer, penile pain with or without acquired penile curvature suggestive of PD). A past or present diagnosis of BDD should also be noted. 9.2.1.2. Sexual history Besides a comprehensive clinical interview with open questions regarding sexual education, development, or previous sexual experiences and fantasies, psychometric tools can be used. These include measurements of sexual functioning (e.g., The International Index of Erectile Function [IIEF]), sexual distress (e.g., The Sexual Distress Scale for men), and sexual satisfaction (e.g., Global Measure of Sexual Satisfaction) [307,1238,1239]. The propensities for sexual excitation and sexual inhibition may be further considered, (e.g., Sexual Inhibition/Sexual Excitation Scales), as well as measurements of relationship satisfaction (e.g., Global Measure of Relationship Satisfaction) [1239,1240]. Special focus should be put on the assessment of sexual performance expectations (e.g., The Dysfunctional Sexual Beliefs Questionnaire) [1241]. As a complementary assessment, body image perception can be further considered (e.g., The Body-Image Questionnaire). 9.2.1.3. Physical examination and penile size measurements An accurate physical examination focused on the genital area is essential to the patient's initial assessment. The assessment of penile size and shape is mandatory to plan any subsequent medical or surgical treatment but methods for penile measurements seem to vary amongst surgeons [1138,1242]. The EAU Guidelines Panel on Sexual and Reproductive Health considers a stretch penile length measurement as the bare minimum. If possible, the Panel also advocates additional measurements in both flaccid and erect state after intracavernosal injection of erectogenic agents, compulsory before any surgical indication. Stretched penile length (SPL) can be measured both dorsally and/or ventrally from the penopubic skin junction-to-glans tip (STT) or dorsally from the pubic bone-to-glans tip (BTT) using either a measuring tape or a Vernier calliper. Overall, the measurement of penile size has not been standardised and to date there is no consensus definition due to high heterogeneity in terms of data assessment and reporting methodologies amongst different studies [1242]. Moreover, penile girth should be noted in every patient. As for girth, both distal (coronal) and mid-shaft measurements should be recorded. Furthermore, both measures of circumference can be compared to the head-to-base ratio. The former can help classify penile shape which can be documented through photography [1243]. Although used as a surrogate, STT underestimates erect penile length by about 20% [876,1244]. Nonetheless, it is important to note that BTT seems to have a better correlation with erect penile length, especially in overweight and obese men [876]. Table 25: Penile size measurement Penile size measurementLengthStateErect, stretched or flaccidAnatomic LandmarksDorsally and/or ventrally from the penopubic skin junction-to-glans tip (STT)Dorsally from the pubic bone-to-glans tip (BTT)GirthStateErect or flaccidAnatomic LandmarksProximal (penopubic skin junction)Middle shaftDistal (Coronal or subcoronal)ShapeHead-to-base ratioStandardised photography 9.2.1.4. Psychological assessment A sub-group of men requesting penile augmentation procedures, usually surgery, present with strong psychological vulnerability, including BDD [1233]. This subgroup of men may be at risk for increasing psychopathology and suicide attempts and will be unlikely to achieve their surgery expectations [1245]. Currently, there is a set of freely available self-reported tools that may be used to screen patients at risk for psychopathology or poor surgical outcomes, including the Body Dysmorphic Disorder Questionnaire and The Cosmetic Procedure Screening Scale for Penile Dysmorphic Disorder, screening for psychopathological cases regarding body and penile dysmorphic disorder [1233,1246]. Likewise, The Male Genital Self-Image Scale, and the Index of Male Genital Image, measure men’s perceptions and satisfaction regarding their genitals [1247,1248]. In addition, the Beliefs About Penile Size Scale captures beliefs about the size of the penis as well as internal psychological processes [1249]. However, evidence on BDD/PDD, further psychopathological comorbidities, and the differential diagnosis regarding personality disorders, and disorders from the obsessive-compulsive, psychotic, or emotional spectrum, should be performed by an accredited mental health expert. In addition, the subjective penile size perception should be evaluated [1134]. 9.2.1.5. Counselling and outcomes assessment - Validated questionnaires The Augmentation Phalloplasty Patient Selection and Satisfaction Inventory (APPSSI) questionnaire is a 5-item questionnaire proposed for the assessment and counselling about penile augmentation surgical treatment [1250]. The Beliefs about Penis Size (BAPS) is a 10-item questionnaire created for audit and outcome research to assess men’s beliefs about penile size [1249]. Both questionnaires have failed to correlate with penile size and lack of objective validation has restricted their use. Other well-known self-reported psychosexual questionnaires may be considered: the IIEF-15 and the Male Sexual Health Questionnaire (MSHQ) should be administered to record baseline sexual function status and can also be used to assess its changes after treatment; the Erectile Dysfunction Inventory of Treatment Satisfaction (EDITS) can also be helpful to assess patient and partner's treatment satisfaction [307,1251,1252]. 9.2.2. Imaging There is a lack of evidence regarding the use of imaging techniques in the assessment of patients complaining about penile shortness. Although a penile Doppler ultrasound or a penile magnetic resonance imaging may provide additional data regarding the penile anatomy and the extent of penile burying, there is no evidence that this additional information could contribute to the physical examination to justify its routine use in this clinical scenario [1138,1253-1256]. Summary of evidenceLEMedical/sexual history taking and physical examination are essential parts of the evaluation of men with a short penis complaint.4Among stretched penile measurements dorsal and/or ventrally from the penopubic skin junction-to-glans tip (STT) may underestimate erect penile length.2bAmong stretched penile measurements dorsally from the pubic bone-to-glans tip (BTT) has a better correlation with erect penile length, especially in overweight and obese men.2bFlaccid and erect state measurements to assess penile length may add useful information on penile size.4Penile girth assessment may add useful information on penile size and shape.4The Body Dysmorphic Disorder Questionnaire, The Cosmetic Procedure Screening Scale for Penile Dysmorphic Disorder, The Male Genital Self-Image Scale and the Index of Male Genital Image are self-reported tools useful to screen patients at risk for psychopathology.2bMental health counselling helps detect men requesting penile augmentation procedures present with strong psychological vulnerability, including BDD/PDD.2bValidated questionnaire (e.g., APPSSI, BAPS, IIEF-15, MSHQ, EDITS) help assess baseline sexual function and beliefs about penile size.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingTake a comprehensive medical and sexual history from every patient presenting complaining of short penile size.StrongUse stretched penile measurements (skin junction-to-glans tip or dorsally from the pubic bone-to-glans tip) to define penile length.WeakMeasure flaccid and erect measurements to assess penile length in detail.WeakMeasure penile girth in every patient presenting complaining of a short penile size.WeakUse validated questionnaires to screen for body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) in cases of a normal-sized penis.WeakUse validated questionnaires (e.g., IIEF-15, BAPS) to assess baseline sexual function and beliefs concerning penile size.WeakRefer patients with suspected BDD for mental health counselling.Strong 