4.2.3. Diagnostic evaluation. 4.2.3.1. History and physical examination There is universal agreement that taking a history, should be the first step in the assessment of anyone with UI. When the history categorises UI as probable SUI the presence of complicated or uncomplicated SUI can also be determined. Those patients who require rapid referral to an appropriate specialist can also often be identified from the clinical history. There is little evidence from clinical trials that carrying out a clinical examination improves clinical outcomes, but there is widespread consensus that it remains an essential part of the assessment of women with SUI. It should include abdominal examination, vaginal examination and careful assessment of any associated POP, examination of the perineum and evaluation of PFM strength, as well as a neuro-urological examination. An attempt to reproduce the SUI should be made. A standing cough test has greater sensitivity for diagnosis of SUI compared with a supine cough test [287]. Despite this, the ICS has proposed a standardisation of the female cough stress test that includes a supine/lithotomy position with 200–400 mL fluid in the bladder and one to four coughs [288]. 4.2.3.1.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for history and physical examination Summary of evidenceLEA standing cough stress test is more sensitive than a supine test.1b RecommendationStrength ratingTake a full clinical history and perform a thorough physical examination including standardised cough stress test in all women presenting with stress urinary incontinence.Strong 4.2.3.2. Patient questionnaires Although many studies have investigated the validity and reliability of urinary symptom questionnaires and PROMs, most of these studies did not include homogeneous populations of adult women diagnosed with SUI. This limits the extent to which results and conclusions from these studies can be specifically applied to women with SUI. Some questionnaires are used for prevalence studies; others are responsive to change and may be used to measure outcomes, although evidence on their sensitivity is inconsistent [26,27]. There is no evidence to indicate whether use of QoL or condition-specific questionnaires has an impact on treatment outcome. To date, there is not one questionnaire that fulfils all requirements for the assessment of women with SUI. 4.2.3.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for patient questionnaires Summary of evidenceLEValidated condition-specific symptom scores assist in the screening for and categorisation of UI.3Validated symptom scores measure the severity and associated bother of SUI.3Both condition-specific and general health status questionnaires measure current health status and are responsive to change following treatment.3 RecommendationStrength ratingUse a validated and appropriate questionnaire as part of the standardised assessment of patients with stress urinary incontinence.Strong 4.2.3.3. Post-void residual volume It is important to evaluate PVR volume in patients with SUI; particularly in those who also have voiding symptoms or POP. The prevalence of a significant PVR volume in patients with SUI is uncertain, partly because of the lack of a standard definition of an abnormal PVR volume. Most studies investigating PVR volume have not included patients with SUI. In general, the data on PVR volume can only be applied with caution to adults with non-neurogenic SUI. In a cohort study of > 900 women with SUI, there was good correlation between PVR volume estimated by US and measured by catheterisation [59]. 4.2.3.3.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for post-void residual volume Summary of evidenceLEThe majority of women with SUI do not have a significant PVR volume.3There is good correlation between PVR volume estimated using US and measured via catheterisation in women with SUI.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingMeasure post-void residual (PVR) volume, particularly when assessing patients with voiding symptoms or complicated stress urinary incontinence (SUI).StrongWhen measuring PVR volume, use ultrasound in preference to catheterisation.StrongMonitor PVR volume in patients scheduled for treatment that may cause or worsen voiding dysfunction, including surgery for SUI.Strong 4.2.3.4. Urodynamics The role of urodynamics in SUI evaluation remains poorly defined and is still under debate. Invasive urodynamic tests are often performed prior to surgical treatment of SUI. Clinical diagnosis of incontinence and cystometric findings often do not correlate [66,67]. The diagnostic accuracy of urethral pressure profilometry [68] and VLPP measurement in SUI is generally poor [289]. Measurement of MUCP correlates, albeit weakly, with incontinence severity [68], and there is conflicting evidence about its reproducibility [64,65]. Methods of recording MUCP cannot be compared meaningfully [290]. Valsalva leak point pressures are not standardised and there is minimal evidence about reproducibility. Valsalva leak point pressures did not reliably assess incontinence severity in a cohort of women selected for surgical treatment of SUI [69]. The predictive value of the tests regarding treatment outcome remains unclear. A Cochrane review including seven RCTs showed that urodynamic tests increased the likelihood of avoiding surgery for SUI. However, there is no evidence that this influence on decision-making alters the clinical outcome of treatment within trial populations [77]. A high-quality RCT (n = 630) compared office evaluation alone and combined with urodynamics in women with clinically demonstrable SUI about to undergo surgery. While urodynamics changed the clinical diagnosis in 56% of women [291], there was no difference in severity of SUI or any secondary outcome at twelve months’ follow-up after SUI surgery [79]. A similar study also found that omission of urodynamics in the preoperative work-up of SUI did not lead to inferior results [292]. Patients in whom urodynamics were discordant with clinical assessment (n = 109) were randomly allocated to receive either immediate surgery or individually tailored therapy based on the urodynamic findings. In this trial, performing immediate surgery, irrespective of the result of urodynamics, did not result in inferior outcomes [293]. An RCT, in which 145 women were randomised to retropubic or trans-obturator MUS, concluded that when patients were stratified according to preoperative VLPP (< or > 60 cm H2O), it was not linked to outcome after both synthetic MUS procedures [294]. Another study reported conflicting evidence. Valsalva leak point pressures or MUCP in the lowest quartile was predictive in terms of synthetic MUS failure at twelve months [83]. The Panel recognises that it may be valuable to use urodynamic test results to help select the optimum surgical procedure, but the evidence outlined above suggests that performing urodynamics in patients with uncomplicated SUI, which can be diagnosed based on detailed clinical history and demonstrated at examination, is not necessary. The role of urodynamics in complicated SUI is still under debate [295]. However, the Panel consensus is that urodynamics should be carefully considered in cases of SUI with associated storage symptoms; cases in which the type of incontinence is unclear; cases in which voiding dysfunction is suspected; and cases with associated POP or prior surgery for SUI. This is in line with other guideline documents in this area [66]. 4.2.3.4.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for urodynamics Summary of evidenceLEPreoperative urodynamic testing in women with uncomplicated, clinically demonstrable, SUI does not improve surgical outcome for SUI.1bThere is no consistent correlation between urethral function tests and subsequent success or failure of SUI surgery.3There is no consistent evidence that preoperative DO is associated with surgical failure of MUS in women.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform preoperative urodynamic tests in cases of SUI with associated storage symptoms, cases in which the type of incontinence is unclear, cases in which voiding dysfunction is suspected, and cases with associated pelvic organ prolapse or prior surgery for SUI.WeakPerform urodynamic tests if the findings may change the choice of invasive treatment.WeakDo not use urethral pressure profilometry or leak point pressure to grade severity of incontinence as they are primarily tests of urethral function.Strong 4.2.3.5. Pad testing Please refer to Section 3.7 for the diagnostic accuracy and predictive value of using pad testing to quantify the presence and severity of SUI. The summary of evidence and recommendations can be found in section 3.7.1. 4.2.3.6. Imaging The role of imaging in SUI patients is limited. Many studies have evaluated imaging of bladder neck mobility by US and MRI and concluded that SUI cannot be identified by a particular pattern of urethro-vesical movement [296].In addition, the generalised increase in urethral mobility after childbirth does not appear to be associated with de novo SUI [297]. Studies have assessed the use of imaging to investigate the mechanism of action of MUS inserted for SUI. One study suggested that MUS placement decreased mobility of the mid-urethra but not mobility of the bladder neck [109]. Following MUS surgery, a wider gap between symphysis and sling (assessed by imaging) has been shown to correlate with a lower chance of cure of SUI [110]. One study of 72 women post-synthetic sub-urethral MUS surgery has investigated the usefulness of trans-labial US to assess tape functionality. In this study different parameters were measured (distance from tape to urethra, position, and shape during Valsalva manoeuvre, etc.) and concluded that tape position relative to the patient’s urethra seems to play a role in treatment outcome [298]. The general role of US in the evaluation and follow-up of women with SUI is unclear, and further research is needed to establish its place in the clinical pathway. Several imaging studies have investigated the relationship between sphincter volume and function [299] and sphincter volume and outcome of surgery [300] in women. However, no imaging test has been shown to predict the outcome of treatment for SUI. Imaging of the pelvic floor can identify levator ani detachment and hiatus size, although there is little evidence of a relationship to clinical benefit after treatment of SUI. 4.2.3.6.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for imaging Summary of evidenceLEImaging can reliably be used to measure bladder neck and urethral mobility, although there is no evidence of clinical benefit for patients with UI.2b RecommendationStrength ratingDo not carry out imaging of the upper or lower urinary tract as part of the routine assessment of stress urinary incontinence.Strong 