4.2.1. Epidemiology, aetiology, pathophysiology. Stress urinary incontinence, defined as the involuntary loss of urine on effort or physical exertion, is a significant health problem worldwide with social and economic impact on women and society. It is estimated that the number of women in the USA with UI will have increased from 18.3 million in 2010 to 28.4 million in 2050 [275]. The prevalence of SUI appears to peak between 45 and 59 years of age [276]. Data regarding the association of UI with ethnicity are conflicting. In several studies, SUI is more common in white women than in women of African American or Asian American origin [277,278]. Other factors positively associated with SUI include parity, obesity, previous hysterectomy or pelvic surgery, diabetes mellitus [279] and pulmonary disease [280]. Physical activity level is another important factor that is positively correlated with SUI severity [281]. A meta-analysis including six studies with a total sample size of 3,678 cases showed that the risk for SUI in women with metabolic syndrome was three times those without [282]. Two common, often overlapping, mechanisms for SUI have been described: (1) urethral hypermobility resulting from loss of support of the bladder neck and urethra; and (2) weakness of the urinary sphincter itself (intrinsic sphincter deficiency), which can result from trauma, radiotherapy, previous pelvic or uro-gynaecological surgery, neurological disease, or ageing. The mechanism behind urethral hypermobility as a cause of SUI is based on the “vaginal hammock” hypothesis [283]. The endopelvic fascia, which is attached to the upper (abdominal) side of the PFMs, links the muscles to the vagina and represents the “hammock”, which can compress the urethra during rest and activity. This compression, combined with intrinsic urethral sphincter pressure, supports, and maintains the urethra in the correct and closed position, preventing involuntary loss of urine, despite any increases in intravesical pressure. Damage to the supporting tissues (particularly the arcus tendinous fasciae pelvis, the central part of the fascia) can result in urethral hypermobility. Consequently, rather than being compressed at times of increased intra-abdominal pressure, the urethra moves caudally, funnelling the bladder neck, and is no longer compressed, resulting in SUI [283,284]. In general, almost all treatments are used for both subtypes of SUI, but in general most treatments are more successful in patients with some degree of urethral hypermobility than for isolated intrinsic weakness of the urinary sphincter [285]. 