4.1.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology. Renal trauma is present in up to 5% of all trauma cases [27]. It is most common in young males and has an overall population incidence of 4.9 per 100,000 [28]. Most injuries can be managed non-operatively with successful organ preservation [29,30]. Blunt injuries result from road traffic accidents/injury, falls, sporting injuries, and assault [31]. The kidney and/or hilar structures are directly crushed as a result. Less commonly, sudden deceleration may result in an avulsion injury affecting the vascular structures of the hilum or the ureteropelvic junction (UPJ). Penetrating injuries are due to stab and gunshot wounds. They tend to be more severe and less predictable than blunt trauma. The prevalence is higher in urban settings [32]. Penetrating injury produces direct tissue disruption of the parenchyma, vascular pedicles, or collecting system. High-velocity bullets or fragments have the potential for greatest parenchymal destruction and are most often associated with multiple-organ injuries [33]. The most commonly used classification system is that of the AAST [12]. It is validated and predicts morbidity and the need for intervention [34,35]. This remains the most useful of urological trauma classifications; however, the majority of Grade 1-4 injuries are now managed conservatively and debate has centred around updating the classification of high-grade injury i.e. identifying the injuries most likely to benefit from early angiographic embolisation, repair or nephrectomy [29,36]. Table 4.1.1: Extract of the AAST renal injury grading scale [37] Grade*Type of injuryDescription of injury1Haematoma and/orContusionSubcapsular non-expanding haematoma or parenchymal contusion without parenchymal laceration.2HaematomaNon-expanding perirenal haematoma confined to Gerota fascia.LacerationRenal parenchymal laceration < 1 cm depth without urinary extravasation.3LacerationRenal parenchymal laceration < 1 cm depth without collecting system rupture or urinary extravasation.Any injury in the presence of a kidney vascular injury or active bleeding contained within Gerota fascia.4LacerationParenchymal laceration extending into urinary collecting system with urinary extravasation.Renal pelvis laceration and/or complete ureteropelvic disruption.VascularSegmental renal vein or artery injury.Active bleeding beyond Gerota fascia into the retroperitoneum or peritoneum.Segmental or complete kidney infarction(s) due to vessel thrombosis without active bleeding.5LacerationShattered kidney with loss of identifiable parenchymal renal anatomy.VascularMain renal artery or vein laceration or avulsion of renal hilum.Devascularised kidney with active bleeding. *Advance one grade for bilateral injuries up to Grade 3.Note: The AAST renal injury scale was updated in 2018 and is presented in Table 4.1.1; however, all references included in this text are based on the AAST 1989 renal injury scale. The 2018 injury scale does not outperform the previous grading system in predicting bleeding and the need for treatment intervention and does not impact on the validity of the current recommendations [38]. 