4.1.3. Imaging: criteria for radiographic assessment. The goals of imaging are to grade the renal injury, document pre-existing renal pathology, demonstrate presence of the contralateral kidney and identify injuries to other organs. Haemodynamic status will determine the initial imaging pathway with unstable patients potentially requiring immediate intervention. The majority of patients with moderate to major trauma will have had a CT scan performed soon after presentation. In patients who have not had any imaging the indications for renal imaging are [31,48-51]: visible haematuria;non-visible haematuria and one episode of hypotension;a history of rapid deceleration injury and/or significant associated injuries;penetrating trauma;clinical signs suggesting renal trauma e.g. flank pain, abrasions, fractured ribs, abdominal distension and/or a mass and tenderness. 4.1.3.1. Computed tomography Computed tomography is the imaging modality of choice in stable patients. It is quick, widely available, and can accurately identify grade of renal injury [52], establish the presence of the contralateral kidney and demonstrate concurrent injuries to other organs. It is ideally performed as a three-phase study [53]: The arterial phase assesses vascular injury and presence of active extravasation of contrast.The nephrographic phase optimally demonstrates parenchymal contusions and lacerations.The delayed phase imaging (five minutes) identifies collecting system/ureteric injury. In practice, trauma patients usually undergo standardised whole-body imaging protocols and delayed phase imaging of the renal tract is not routinely performed. If there is suspicion that renal injuries have not been fully evaluated, delayed phase imaging is recommended. The rates of contrast-induced nephropathy seen in trauma patients is low [54]. 4.1.3.2. Ultrasonography (US) In the primary survey of a critically injured patient, FAST (Focused Assessment Sonography in Trauma) is used to identify hemoperitoneum as the cause of haemorrhage and hypovolemia. However, it is not routinely used for the assessment of solid organ injury as it is insensitive, operator dependant, does not define the injury well, and is inferior to CT. It is an option for follow-up [55-57]. 4.1.3.3. Other imaging modalities 4.1.3.3.1. Intravenous pyelography (IVP) Intravenous pyelography and radionuclide scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) do not have a significant role in the trauma setting. The quality of one shot IVP is generally poor. Palpation of the contralateral (unaffected) kidney is a pragmatic surrogate of function [18]. The diagnostic accuracy of MRI in renal trauma is similar to that of CT [58,59]. However, the logistical challenges of MRI make this modality impractical in acute trauma. 