4.1.5. Follow-up. The risk of complications relates to aetiology, injury grade, and mode of management [118,119]. Follow-up includes physical examination, urinalysis, diagnostic imaging, blood pressure measurement and serum creatinine [66]. Potential complications are primarily identified by imaging; however, follow-up imaging is not recommended in low-grade uncomplicated injury. Ultrasound can be used to define the post-injury anatomy avoiding further ionising radiation. Nuclear scans are useful for documenting functional recovery following renal injury and reconstruction [120]. Annual blood pressure monitoring is recommended to exclude renovascular hypertension [121]. 4.1.5.1. Complications Early (< 1 month) complications include bleeding, infection, perinephric abscess, sepsis, urinary fistula, hypertension, urinary extravasation, and urinoma. Delayed complications include bleeding, calculus formation, chronic pyelonephritis, hypertension, AVF, hydronephrosis and pseudo-aneurysms. Bleeding may be life-threatening with elective angiographic embolisation the preferred treatment [122]. Perinephric abscess formation is initially managed by percutaneous drainage [106]. Hypertension is rare [123,124]. It may occur acutely because of external compression from peri-renal haematoma (Page kidney), chronically due to compressive scar formation, or as a result of renal artery thrombosis, segmental arterial thrombosis, renal artery stenosis (Goldblatt kidney), or AVF. Arteriography may be required. Treatment, including medical management, excision of the ischaemic parenchymal segment, vascular reconstruction, or nephrectomy, is indicated if hypertension persists [121]. Arteriovenous fistulae usually present with delayed onset of significant haematuria, most often after penetrating trauma. Percutaneous embolisation is often effective for symptomatic AVF, but larger fistulae may require surgery [125]. The development of pseudo-aneurysm is a rare complication following blunt trauma. 