3.16.2. Classification systems. Urinary stone formation is the result of a complex process involving genetic, dietary, metabolic, anatomical factors and presence of infection. 3.16.2.1. Calcium stones Calcium stones are usually made from calcium oxalate or calcium phosphate. Super-saturation of calcium (hypercalciuria) and oxalate (hyperoxaluria) or decreased concentration of inhibitors, such as citrate (hypocitraturia) or magnesium (hypomagnesemia) play a major role in the formation of calcium oxalate stones. Higher super-saturations of calcium oxalate were shown to be associated with multiple stone disease [1052]. Hypercalciuria: This is defined by a 24-hour urinary calcium excretion of more than 4 mg/kg/day (0.1 mmol/kg/ day) in a child weighing < 60 kg. In infants younger than three months, 5 mg/kg/day (0.125 mmol/kg/day) is considered to be the upper limit for normal calcium excretion [1053]. Hypercalciuria can be classified as either idiopathic or secondary. Idiopathic hypercalciuria is diagnosed when clinical, laboratory, and radiographic investigations fail to delineate an underlying cause leading to hypercalcaemia. Urinary calcium may increase in patients with high sodium chloride intake. Secondary hypercalciuria occurs when a known process produces excessive urinary calcium. In secondary hypercalcaemic hypercalciuria, a high serum calcium level may be due to increased bone resorption (hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, immobilisation, acidosis, metastatic disease) or gastrointestinal hyperabsorption (hypervitaminosis D) [1054]. A good screening test for hypercalciuria compares the ratio of urinary calcium to creatinine. The normal calcium-to-creatinine ratio in children is less than 0.2. If the calculated ratio is higher than 0.2, repeat-testing is indicated. Neonates and infants have a higher calcium excretion and lower creatinine excretion than older children [1053,1054]. If the follow-up ratios are normal, then no additional testing for hypercalciuria is needed. However, if the ratio remains elevated, a timed 24-hour urine collection should be obtained and the calcium excretion calculated. The 24-hour calcium excretion test is the standard criterion for the diagnosis of hypercalciuria. If calcium excretion is higher than 4 mg/kg/day (0.1 mmol/kg/day), the diagnosis of hypercalciuria is confirmed and further evaluation is warranted: levels of serum bicarbonate, creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, pH, and parathyroid hormone. Freshly voided urine should be measured for pH [1053-1055]. In addition to calcium, the 24-hour urine analysis should also include phosphorus, sodium, magnesium, uric acid, citrate and oxalate. Initial management is always to increase fluid intake and urinary flow. Dietary modification is a mandatory part of effective therapy. The child should be referred to a dietician to accurately assess the daily intake of calcium, animal protein, and sodium. Dietary sodium restriction is recommended as well as maintenance of calcium intake consistent with the daily needs of the child [1056]. A brief trial of a low calcium diet can be carried out to determine if exogenous calcium intake and/or calcium hyperabsorption is contributing to high urinary calcium. Any recommendation to restrict calcium intake below the daily needs of the child should be avoided. Moreover, low calcium intake is a risk factor for stone formation [1057] (LE: 3). Hydrochlorothiazide and other thiazide-type diuretics may be used to treat idiopathic hypercalciuria, especially with calcium renal leak, at a starting dosage of 0.5-1 mg/kg/day [1058-1061] (LE: 3). In long-term use of thiazide-type diuretics, a decrease in hypocalciuric effect may be seen after the third month and may cause hypokalemia, hypocitraturia, hyperuricaemia and hypomagnesaemia. Therefore, control of blood and serum values should be performed in regular intervals. Citrate therapy is also useful if citrate levels are low or if hypercalciuria persists, despite other therapies [1058,1062] (LE: 4). Hyperoxaluria: Only 10-15% of oxalate is dietary. The average child excretes less than 50 mg (0.57 mmol)/1.73 m2/day [1063-1065], while infants excrete four times as much. Hyperoxaluria may result from increased dietary intake, enteric hyperabsorption (as in short bowel syndrome) or an inborn error of metabolism. In rare primary hyperoxaluria, one of the two liver enzymes that play a role in the metabolism of oxalate may be deficient. With increased deposition of calcium oxalate in the kidneys, renal failure may ensue, resulting in deposition of calcium oxalate in other tissues (oxalosis). The diagnosis is made upon laboratory findings of severe hyperoxaluria and clinical symptoms. The definitive diagnosis requires a liver biopsy to assay the enzyme activity. Patients with primary hyperoxaluria exhibit a substantial clinical burden such as renal stones, UTIs and pain, requiring frequent healthcare resource use [1066]. Other forms of hyperoxaluria, as mentioned earlier, may be due to hyperabsorption of oxalate in inflammatory bowel syndrome, pancreatitis and short bowel syndrome. Yet, the majority of children have ‘mild’ (idiopathic) hyperoxaluria, with only mildly elevated urine oxalate levels in these cases. The treatment of hyperoxaluria consists of the promotion of high urine flow, restriction of dietary oxalate and regular calcium intake. Pyridoxine may be useful in reducing urine levels, especially in primary hyperoxaluria. Citrate administration increases inhibitory urine activity [1058,1067] (LE: 4). Hypocitraturia: Citrate is a urinary stone inhibitor. It acts by binding to calcium and by directly inhibiting the growth and aggregation of calcium oxalate as well as calcium phosphate crystals. Thus low urine citrate may be a significant cause of calcium stone disease. In adults, hypocitraturia is the excretion of urinary citrate of less than 320 mg/day (1.5 mmol/day); this value must be adjusted for children depending on body size [1068-1070]. Hypocitraturia usually occurs in the absence of any concurrent symptoms or any known metabolic derangements. It may also occur in association with any metabolic acidosis, distal tubular acidosis or diarrhoeal syndromes. Environmental factors that lower urinary citrate include a high protein intake and excessive salt intake. Many reports emphasise the significance of hypocitraturia in paediatric calcium stone disease. The presence of hypocitraturia ranges from 30% to 60% in children with calcium stone disease [1069,1071]. The urine calcium-to-citrate ratios were higher in recurrent calcium stone forming children than solitary formers [1068,1072]. The restoration of normal citrate levels is advocated to reduce stone formation, although there are few relevant studies in children. Hypocitraturia is treated by potassium citrate at a starting dose of 1 mEq/kg, given in two divided doses [1059] (LE: 3). The side effects of potassium citrate are very rare and most of the time they include non-specific gastrointestinal complaints. Potassium citrate should be used with caution in hyperkalemic and chronic renal failure conditions. 3.16.2.2. Uric acid stones Uric acid stones are responsible for urinary calculi in 4-8% of children. Uric acid is the end product of purine metabolism. Hyperuricosuria is the main cause of uric acid stone formation in children. A daily output of uric acid of more than 10 mg/kg/day (0.6 mmol/kg/day) is considered to be hyperuricosuria [1058]. The formation of uric acid stones is mainly dependent on the presence of an acidic urinary composition. Uric acid dissociation and solubility is strongly reduced at a pH of < 5.8. As the pH becomes more alkaline, uric acid crystals become more soluble and the risk of uric acid stone formation is reduced. In the familial or idiopathic form of hyperuricosuria, children usually have normal serum uric acid levels. In other children, it can be caused by uric acid overproduction secondary to inborn errors of metabolism, myeloproliferative disorders or other causes of cell breakdown. Hyperuricosuria is also caused by high purine and protein intake. Although hyperuricosuria is a risk factor for calcium oxalate stone formation in adults, this does not appear to be a significant risk factor in children. Uric acid stones are non-opaque stones. Plain x-rays are insufficient to show uric acid stones, and renal sonography and spiral CT are used for diagnosis. Alkalinisation of urine is the mainstay of therapy and prevention for uric acid stones. Citrate preparations are useful as alkalinising agents. Maintaining a urine pH of 6 to 6.5 is sufficient to prevent uric acid stones [1058]. In patients who failed conservative measures with sustaining hyperuricosuria and hyperuricemia, stone recurrences or myeloproliferative diseases, allopurinol (10 mg/kg) may be used. This medication may cause several drug reactions (rash, diarrhoea, eosinophilia) and should be cautiously used in chronic renal failure patients. 3.16.2.3. Cystine stones Cystinuria is the cause of cystine stone formation and accounts for 2-6% of all urinary stones in children. Cystinuria is an incompletely recessive autosomal disorder characterised by failure of renal tubules to reabsorb four basic amino acids: cystine, ornithine, lysine and arginine. Of these four amino acids, only cystine has poor solubility in urine, so that only cystine stones may form in the case of excessive excretion in urine. Cystine solubility is pH-dependent, with cysteine precipitation beginning at pH levels < 7.0. Other metabolic conditions, such as hypercalciuria, hypocitraturia and hyperuricosuria, may accompany cystinuria, so leading to the formation of mixed-composition stones. Cystine stones are faintly radiopaque and may be difficult to visualise on regular radiograph studies. They are also hard in texture and more difficult to disintegrate by extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (SWL). Cystinuric patients present with larger stones at the time of diagnosis, higher new stone formation rates, and are at higher risk of surgery [1073]. The medical treatment for cystine stones aims to reduce cystine saturation in urine and increase its solubility. The initial treatment consists of maintaining a high urine flow and the use of alkalinising agents, such as potassium citrate to maintain urine pH at above 7.0 (better above 7.5). If this treatment fails, the use of α-mercaptopropionyl glycine or D-penicillamin may increase cystine solubility and reduce cystine levels in urine and prevent stone formation. Side effects of these drugs are mostly mild and include gastrointestinal complaints (alterations in taste and odour), fever and rash, however they can be associated with severe side effects, such as bone marrow depression, nephrotic syndrome and epidermolysis [1074]. 3.16.2.4. Infection stones (struvite stones) Infection-related stones constitute nearly 5% of urinary stones in children, though incidence increases over 10% in younger ages [1075] and in non-endemic regions [1049,1076]. Bacteria capable of producing urease enzyme (Proteus, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas) are responsible for the formation of such stones. Urease converts urea into ammonia and bicarbonate, alkalinising the urine and further converting bicarbonate into carbonate. In the alkaline environment, triple phosphates form, eventually resulting in a supersaturated environment of magnesium ammonium phosphate and carbonate apatite, which in turn leads to stone formation. In addition to bacterial elimination, stone elimination is essential for treatment, as stones will harbour infection and antibiotic treatment will not be effective. Consideration should be given to investigating any congenital problem that causes stasis and infection. Genitourinary tract anomalies predispose to formation of such stones. 