3.16.3. Diagnostic evaluation. Presentation tends to be age-dependent, with symptoms such as flank pain and haematuria being more common in older children. Non-specific symptoms (e.g. irritability, vomiting) are common in very young children. Haematuria, usually visible, occurring with or without pain, is less common in children. However, non-visible haematuria may be the sole indicator and is more common in children. In some cases, urinary infection may be the only finding leading to radiological imaging in which a stone is identified [1077,1078]. 3.16.3.1. Imaging Generally, US should be used as a first approach. Renal US is very effective for identifying stones in the kidney. Many radiopaque stones can be identified with a simple abdominal flat-plate examination. The most sensitive test for identifying stones in the urinary system (especially for ureteric stones) is non-contrast helical CT scanning. It is safe and rapid, with 97% sensitivity and 96% specificity [1079-1081]. Despite its high diagnostic accuracy, because of the potential radiation hazards, its use should be reserved for cases with non-informative US and/or plain abdominal radiograph. Low dose protocols have also been developed with the goal of reducing radiation dose with adequate image quality [1082]. Intravenous pyelography is rarely used in children, but may be needed to delineate the caliceal anatomy prior to percutaneous or open surgery. 3.16.3.2. Metabolic evaluation Due to the high incidence of predisposing factors for urolithiasis in children and high stone recurrence rates, every child with a urinary stone should be given a complete metabolic evaluation [1041,1074,1083-1085]. A limited urinary metabolic evaluation (24-h calcium, 24h-citrate, and 24h-oxalate and low urinary volume) is able to detect the vast majority of clinically significant metabolic abnormalities [1086]. However, most of the time collections are inadequate and have to be repeated [1087]. Metabolic evaluation includes: family and patient history of metabolic problems and dietary habits;analysis of stone composition (following stone analysis, metabolic evaluation can be modified according to the specific stone type);electrolytes, blood/urea/nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, uric acid, total protein, carbonate, albumin, and parathyroid hormone (if there is hypercalcaemia);spot urinalysis and urine culture, including ratio of calcium to creatinine;urine tests, including a 24-hour urine collection for calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, oxalate, uric acid citrate, protein, and creatinine clearance;24-hour cystine analysis if cystinuria is suspected (positive sodium nitroprusside test, cystine stone, cystine hexagonal crystals in urine). Figure 11 provides an algorithm of how to perform metabolic investigations in urinary stone disease in children and how to plan medical treatment accordingly. Figure 11: Algorithm for metabolic investigations in urinary stone disease in childrenCa = calcium; HCTZ = hydrochlorothiazide; Mg = magnesium; Ox = oxalate; PTH = parathyroid hormone; SWL = extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy; RTA = renal tubular acidosis; Uric A = uric acid. 3.16.3.3. Urolithiasis in infants Approximately 9 to 23% of paediatric urolithiasis patients are under one year old. Infantile urolithiasis appears to be a separate entity since the aetiology and the clinical course of the disease is different than in other age groups. A study on 2,513 children with urolithiasis demonstrated that microlithiasis (< 3mm) in infants should be differentiated from other age groups since the majority of them (85%) resolve spontaneously after one year of follow-up. It has also been shown that underlying metabolic abnormality is different than in older children. In this specific age group, calcium oxalate stones are not as common as in older age groups, whereas ammonium acid urate stones are more common [1042,1088]. However if the stone size increases or the patient becomes symptomatic during follow-up, it should be treated appropriately. Another study found that only 15% of infantile urolithiasis required intervention after one year follow-up and the only predictor for intervention was the size of the stone [1089]. Two other studies concluded that stone size larger than 4.5 mm and 5 mm in infants are more likely to require intervention [1090,1091]. Therefore observation should be the primary option for the majority of the infantile urolithiasis; if the patient becomes symptomatic or there is an increase in size, intervention can be discussed. If an intervention is planned, SWL, RIRS or PCNL can be offered depending on the characteristics of the stone and the patient. All treatment modalities were found to be feasible with high success rates in infants [1092-1094]. 