6.2.1. Introduction. The development of lymphatic metastases in penile cancer follows the route of anatomical drainage from the primary tumour to the superficial and then deep inguinal LNs (which can occur on both or either side), followed by the ipsilateral pelvic LNs. The superficial nodes are located under the subcutaneous fascia and above the fascia lata within Scarpa’s triangle. The deep nodes lie within the region of the fossa ovalis where the superficial saphenous veins anastomose with the femoral vein at the saphenofemoral junction. The Cloquet’s node (or Rosenmuller’s node) is located medial to the femoral vein around the entrance to the femoral canal and marks the transition between inguinal and pelvic regions. Daseler et al., divided the superficial inguinal LNs into five regions centred around the saphenofemoral junction; central, lateral superior, lateral inferior, medial superior and medial inferior [194]. Studies of radical ILND (rILND) as well as single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging suggest that sentinel inguinal nodes, i.e., those first affected by lymphatic spread, appear to be located in the medial superior zone followed by the central inguinal zones [194-196].No solitary lymphatic spread has been observed from the penis to the two inferior groin regions and no direct drainage to the pelvic nodes, either [194-196]. Pelvic nodal disease does not occur without ipsilateral inguinal LN metastasis. Also, crossover metastatic spread, from one groin to the contralateral pelvis, is rare [197]. Further lymphatic spread from the pelvic nodes to retroperitoneal nodes (para-aortic, para-caval) is classified as systemic metastatic disease [198]. The management of regional LNs is decisive for patient survival. The presence and extent of nodal involvement is singulary the most important prognostic factor in patients with penile cancer. Cure can be achieved in limited LN-disease confined to the regional LNs. Radical LND is the treatment of choice. Multimodal treatment combining surgery, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy is often indicated for more advanced disease. In clinically positive LNs (cN1/cN2), more extensive LN metastasis is highly likely and LN surgery with histology is required. Given the very high chance of recurrence, enlarged fixed inguinal LNs (cN3) or clinically evident pelvic metastases require multimodal treatment by induction chemotherapy and consolidative surgery in responding patients. Even if present in only one node, extra-capsular extension/ENE, or pelvic LN metastasis found at surgery carries a high risk of progression and is classified as pN3 and requires multimodal treatment. Given the complexities of regional node management, the intent of the Panel in the following sections (i.e., Sections 6.2–6.4) is to describe the available evidence-based strategies in the management of clinically evident LN metastases (i.e., cN1–cN3). These include inguinal/pelvic LND, chemotherapy, radiotherapy ± chemotherapy and integrated strategies such as neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapies combined with surgery. The reader is encouraged to review the text sections, summaries of evidence, and recommendation tables collectively in order to better understand recommendations for single vs. multimodal treatment and currently available data utilising various strategies. 