6.2.3. Prophylactic pelvic lymph node dissection. Prophylactic PLND (pPLND) in most cases represents a staging procedure that can thus identify candidates for early adjuvant therapy, although in select patients may also provide a therapeutic benefit. 6.2.3.1. Indications for prophylactic pelvic lymph node dissection 6.2.3.1.1. Risk factors for pelvic nodal metastasis To identify patients with pelvic LN metastasis in the absence of radiological evidence for LN involvement, several studies have tried to develop generalized estimating models based on inguinal characteristics using logistic regression and multivariate analysis. Among various predictors, the number of positive inguinal LNs (1–2 vs. 3, or more, with no extra-capsular extension) was associated with positive pelvic LNs in 0–6.5% of patients vs. 33–67% of patients [249,250]. The presence of extracapsular spread was also consistently significantly associated with positive ipsilateral pelvic LN metastasis in 4 studies [249-252] Strong immunoreactivity of p53, LN density > 30% and primary tumour grade are also reported as predictors of pelvic LN involvement [250]. 6.2.3.2. What is an acceptable dissection? In a study by Yao et el., the authors prospectively mapped the distribution of positive pelvic LNs at the time of PLND in 128 patients [197]. Most patients underwent bilateral PLND (86.7%). The median number of nodes retrieved per groin was 18 (interquartile range [IQR] 10–30), with the distribution of positive nodes in the external iliac, obturator, common iliac, internal iliac and presacral packages 50%, 36.6%, 7%, 6.4% and 0%, respectively. Notably two patients were observed to have crossover metastasis from one inguinal region to the contralateral pelvic region, defying the accepted understanding of the historical literature. When the extent of dissection was considered in context of overall- and RFS there was no statistically significant difference [197]. Similar data was seen in a study by Zhu et al., with the external iliac package being more commonly involved than the obturator and common iliac packages [253]. To evaluate the prognostic impact of LN yield on survival outcomes for penile SCC, Chipollini et al., examined 198 patients undergoing PLND [208]. In their cohort they found a LN yield of > 9 was a predictor of RFS (HR: 0.53, p = 0.032). 6.2.3.3. Survival and recurrence The evidence that pPLND has an additional therapeutic effect over surveillance or adjuvant radiotherapy (see Section 6.4.2.2) is limited and significant controversy remains. Djajadiningrat et al., estimated the 5-year DSS in all patients treated with pPLND was 51%. Patients with positive pelvic nodes had a significantly worse 5-year DSS than those without pelvic involvement (17%, 95% CI: 6–47 vs. 62%, 95% CI: 50–76, p < 0.001) [251]. A retrospective multicentre study compared the outcomes of bilateral pPLND for N2 or N3 disease vs. no surgery and reported better 5-year OS in the pPLND group (35% vs. 25%) without reaching statistical significance [254]. In N2 patients, 3-year OS was significantly better in the PLND group as compared to the no-surgery group (83.3% vs. 50.2%, p = 0.03) [254]. This difference was not evident in N3 patients. 6.2.3.4. Complications There is limited data available regarding the reporting of complications from PLND. This is complicated by the fact that most patients will have already undergone a rILND which carries a significant morbidity as discussed above. A single-centre experience of 89 patients, undergoing open PLND for penile cancer reported an overall complication rate of 18%. Nine patients had wound complications including infection, seroma, and dehiscence. The remaining 5 patients had non-wound-related complications such as pneumonia, delirium, and ileus [251]. 6.2.3.5. Minimally-invasive versus open pelvic lymph node dissection In a SR commissioned by the Panel there were no reported studies that examined the role of minimally-invasive pPLND in the setting of penile cancer and PLND. There is, however, a significant body of evidence that exists in other common urological malignancies that demonstrates equivalent oncological outcome as well as improved morbidity profile and recovery profile. 6.2.3.6. Summary of evidence and guidelines for prophylactic pelvic lymph node dissection Summary of evidenceLEProphylactic PLND in most cases represents a staging procedure that can thus identify candidates for early adjuvant therapy, although in select patients it may also provide a therapeutic benefit.3Three or more positive inguinal nodes or extranodal extension of cancer in inguinal nodes are associated with a significantly higher incidence of pelvic LN metastases.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer open or minimally-invasive prophylactic ipsilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy topatients if:three or more inguinal nodes are involved on one side on pathological examinationextranodal extension is reported on pathological examinationWeakComplete surgical inguinal and pelvic nodal management within three months of diagnosis (unless the patient has undergone neoadjuvant chemotherapy).Weak 