3.7.5. Management. 3.7.5.1. Indication for reconstruction and therapeutic objectives Differentiation between functionally necessary and aesthetically feasible operative procedures is important for therapeutic decision making. The indications for surgery are: proximally located (ectopic) meatus causing ventrally deflected or spraying urinary stream;meatal stenosis;anterior curvature of the penis;cleft glans;rotated penis with abnormal cutaneous raphe;preputial hood;penoscrotal transposition;split scrotum. Physical examination should check all anatomic components of the penis and evaluate the degree and nature of abnormality in each component. The examination should evaluate location of the meatus, the degree of proximal spongiosal hypoplasia, presence and degree of penile curvature, width and depth of the urethral plate, size of the glans, degree of ventral skin deficiency, availability of the foreskin and scrotal abnormalities like penoscrotal transposition and bifid scrotum. As all surgical procedures carry the risk of complications, thorough pre-operative counselling of the caregiver is crucial. To achieve an overall acceptable functional and cosmetic outcome, the penile curvature must be corrected and a neo-urethra of an adequate size with opening on the glans formed with proper skin coverage of the penile shaft [315] (LE: 4) (Figure 4). The use of magnifying spectacles and fine synthetic absorbable suture materials (6.0-7.0) are required. As in any penile surgery, exceptional prudence should be adopted with the use of cautery. Bipolar cautery is recommended. Knowledge of a variety of surgical reconstructive techniques, wound care and post-operative treatment are essential for a satisfactory outcome. 3.7.5.2. Pre-operative hormonal treatment There is a lack of high-quality evidence to support that pre-operative hormonal treatment with androgen stimulation improves surgical outcomes. Yet, this treatment in the form of systemic testosterone, topical testosterone, and derivatives like dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and hCG are commonly being used to increase glans size pre-operatively to allow better tubularisation of the urethral plate and decrease the incidence of glans dehiscence. This treatment is usually limited to patients with proximal hypospadias, a small appearing penis, reduced glans circumference or reduced urethral plate [313,316,317]. Studies have shown that it leads to significant enlargement of the glans and shaft of the penis (LE: 1b) [318,319]. Moderate quality evidence from three randomised studies demonstrate significantly lower rates of urethracutaneous fistulae and re-operation rates in patients who received pre-operative hormonal treatment [320]. Pre-operative testosterone administration is most often well tolerated. Transient side effects on child´s behaviour, increased genital pigmentation, appearance of pubic hair, penile skin irritation and redness, increased erections and peri-operative bleeding have been reported, but no persistent side effects related to hormonal stimulation have been reported in the literature. There is also no evidence about possible effects on bone maturation [317,320,321]. There are concerns regarding the negative impacts of testosterone on wound-healing and increased bleeding during surgery. Cessation of therapy is recommended one or two months prior to surgery to avoid adverse effects during or after surgery [322]. 3.7.5.3. Age at surgery The age at surgery for primary hypospadias repair is usually 6-18 (24) months [315,323,324] (LE: 3). Age at surgery is not a risk factor for urethroplasty complication in pre-pubertal tubularised incised plate urethroplasty (TIP) repair [323] (LE: 2b). Complication rate after primary TIP repair was 2.5 times higher in adults than in the paediatric group according to a prospective controlled study [325] (LE: 2a). 3.7.5.4. Penile curvature If present, penile curvature is often released by degloving the penis (skin chordee) and by excision of the connective tissue of the genuine chordee on the ventral aspect of the penis in up to 70% [326]. The urethral plate has well vascularised connective tissue and does not cause curvature in most cases [327,328]. The residual curvature is caused by corporeal disproportion and requires straightening of the penis, mostly using dorsal midline plication or orthoplasty (modification of the Nesbit plication with or without elevation of the neurovascular bundle). In more severe curvature (> 45°), which is often combined with a short urethral plate requiring transection, ventral penile lengthening is recommended to prevent shortening of the penis. This consists of a ventral transverse incision of the tunica albuginea extending from the 3 to 9 o´clock position patched with tunica vaginalis flap or graft, or in several short ventral corporotomies without grafting (LE: 2b) [329]. After the ventral lengthening, a shorter dorsal midline plication is usually added. According to a retrospective study, dorsal plication remained significantly associated with recurrent ventral curvature independently of the other factors. Ventral corporeal grafting for severe penile curvature gives good long-term results and safety profiles for erectile function [330] (LE: 2b). 3.7.5.5. Urethral reconstruction The mainstay of hypospadias repair is preservation of the well-vascularised urethral plate and its use for urethral reconstruction has become standard practice in hypospadias repair [328]. Mobilisation of the corpus spongiosum/urethral plate and the bulbar urethra decreases the need for urethral plate transection [329] (LE: 2b). If the urethral plate is wide, it can be tubularised following the Thiersch-Duplay technique. If the plate is too narrow to be simply tubularised, it is recommended relaxing the plate by a midline incision and its subsequent tubularisation according to the Snodgrass-Orkiszewski TIP technique. This technique has become the treatment of choice in distal- and mid-penile hypospadias [331-334]. If the incision of the plate is deep, it is recommended to cover the raw surface with inner preputial (or buccal) inlay graft in primary and secondary repairs [335]. This also enables extension of the incision beyond the end of the plate to prevent meatal stenosis [336,337] (LE: 2a). For distal forms of hypospadias, a range of other techniques is available (e.g. Mathieu, urethral advancement) [338] (LE: 2b). The TIP technique has become an option for proximal hypospadias as well [331-334,339]. However, urethral plate elevation and urethral mobilisation should not be combined with TIP repair because it results in focal devascularisation of the neo-urethra with symptomatic stricture development [340] (LE: 2b). The onlay technique using a preputial island flap is a standard repair, preferred in proximal hypospadias, if a plate is unhealthy or too narrow [326]. An onlay preputial graft is an option for single-stage repair [341] (LE: 2b). If the continuity of the urethral plate cannot be preserved, single or two-stage repairs are used. For the former, a modification of the tubularised flap (Duckett tube), such as a tube-onlay or an inlay-onlay flap, or onlay flap on albuginea are used to prevent urethral stricture [342-344] (LE: 3); alternatively the Koyanagi-Hayashi technique is used [345-348]. The two-stage procedure has become preferable over the past few years because of lower recurrence of ventral curvature and more favourable results with variable long-term complication rates [337,342,349-353]. 3.7.5.6. Re-do hypospadias repairs For re-do hypospadias repairs, no definitive guidelines can be given. All the above-mentioned procedures are used in different ways and are often modified according to the individual findings and needs of the patient. Figure 4: Algorithm for the management of hypospadiasDSD = disorders of sex development; TIP = tubularised incised plate urethroplasty; MAGPI = meatal advancement and glanuloplasty incorporated. 3.7.5.7. Penile reconstruction following formation of the neo-urethra Following formation of the neo-urethra, the procedure is completed by glansplasty and by reconstruction of the penile skin. If there is a shortage of skin covering, the preputial double-face technique or placement of the suture line into the scrotum according to Cecil-Michalowski is used. In countries where circumcision is not routinely performed, preputial reconstruction can be considered. Preputial reconstruction carries a risk of specific complications but does not seem to increase the risk of urethroplasty complications [354]. In TIP repair, the use of a preputial dartos flap reduces the fistula rate [331,332] (LE: 2b). 3.7.5.8. Urine drainage and wound dressing Urine is drained transurethrally (e.g. dripping stent) or with a suprapubic tube. No drainage after distal hypospadias repair is another option [355,356]. Circular dressing with slight compression, as well as prophylactic antibiotics during surgery, are established procedures [356] (LE: 4). Post-operative prophylaxis after hypospadias repair has limited benefit and it only reduces the risk of asymptomatic bacteriuria [357-359] (LE: 2b). There is no consensus on duration of stenting and dressing. 3.7.5.9. Outcome Some studies have tried to determine risk factors for complications after hypospadias repair. An analysis of prospectively collected data found glans size (width < 14 mm), proximal meatal location and re-operation as independent risk factors for urethral complication [356,360]. Low surgeon volume independently increases the risk of fistula, stricture or diverticulum repair [356,361] (LE: 3). A meta-analysis of complication rates of TIP repair found lower complication rates and incidence of re-operations in primary distal repairs (in 4.5%) than in primary proximal repairs (in 12.2%) and in secondary repair (in 23.3%) [331-334,338,356]. One should expect a predictable outcome with complication rates below 10% in distal hypospadias (fistula, meatal stenosis, dehiscence, recurrent ventral curvature, and haematoma) [361,362]. A similar incidence of fistula (3.4-3.6%) can be expected after the Mathieu and TIP repairs of distal hypospadias [339,363-365]. The complication rates of TIP and onlay repairs of primary severe hypospadias are similar, 24% and 27%, respectively. It is higher in free graft and in preputial island tube urethroplasty [326]. There is no strong evidence to suggest that the use of inlay grafts in TIP repair improves the outcome [366]. The complication rates of single-stage Koyanagi and Hayashi modification repairs go up 61%, according to a comparative study [345,356]. Staged buccal mucosa graft requires a redo grafting in 13% of patients, after the second stage more than one third of patients have complications, mostly with some degree of graft fibrosis [364,367]. A long-term study on two-stage flap repair showed a complication rate of 68% [356]; another study showed a re-operation rate of 28% [337,356]. 