3.7.6. Follow-up. Long-term follow-up is necessary up to adolescence to detect urethral stricture, voiding dysfunctions and recurrent penile curvature, diverticula, glanular dehiscence [368]. Up to half of complications requiring re-operation present after the first year post-operatively [369] (LE: 2b). Obstructive flow curve is common after hypospadias repair and while most are not clinically significant, long-term follow-up is required [370-373] (LE: 2a). Urine flow is significantly lower in patients after hypospadias surgery, especially in those who had corrected chordee, but without significant association with lower urinary symptoms (LUTS) [374] (LE: 2a). Objective scoring systems have been developed in order to evaluate the results of hypospadias surgery (HOSE) [375] (LE: 2b) and cosmetic appearance (HOPE-Hypospadias Objective Penile Evaluation) [376] (LE: 2a). The Pediatric Penile Perception Score (PPPS) is a reliable instrument to assess penile self-perception in children after hypospadias repair and for appraisal of the surgical result by caregivers and uninvolved urologists [377] (LE: 2a). Cosmetic results were judged more optimistically by surgeons as compared to caregivers using validated tools [378]. Current scoring systems have deficiencies in terms of patient reported outcomes, the long term outcomes and sexual function [379]. Adolescents and adults, who have undergone hypospadias repair in childhood, have a slightly higher rate of dissatisfaction with penile size, especially proximal hypospadias patients, but their sexual behaviour is not different from that of control groups [380,381] (LE: 2a-b). Another long-term follow-up of men born with hypospadias revealed, in a controlled study, that these patients are less satisfied with penile cosmetic outcome according to all parameters of the PPPS; there was a difference in penile length (9.7 vs. 11.6 cm) and more patients had lower maximum urinary flow. More prominent results were found in proximal hypospadias vs. controls [356,382]. According to a systematic review of long-term patient satisfaction with cosmetic outcomes [383]: patient perception of penile size does not differ greatly from the norm;patients approaching puberty have a more negative perception and are more critical about the cosmetic outcomes of surgery;patients report high levels of perception of deformity and social embarrassment. There is a wide range of parameters that are measured to assess outcome after hypospadias surgery in the literature. There is a need for age-specific core outcome set [384]. The majority of identified instruments focused on post-operative cosmetic satisfaction, with only one instrument considering urinary function, and no instruments evaluating sexual function and psychosocial sequelae [385]. 