7.1.2. Surgical treatment. 7.1.2.1. Nephron-sparing surgery versus radical nephrectomy in localised RCC 7.1.2.1.1. T1 RCC Outcome 1: Cancer-specific survivalMost studies comparing the oncological outcomes of PN and RN are retrospective and include cohorts of varied and, overall, limited size [270,271]. There is only one, prematurely closed, prospective RCT including patients with organ-confined RCCs of limited size (< 5 cm) published, showing comparable non-inferiority of CSS for PN vs. RN (HR: 2.06 [95% CI: 0.62–6.84]) [272]. Outcomes 2 & 3: Overall mortality and renal functionPartial nephrectomy preserved kidney function better after surgery, thereby potentially lowering the risk of development of cardiovascular disorders [270,273-277]. When compared with a radical surgical approach, several retrospective analyses of large databases have suggested a decreased cardiovascular-specific mortality [274,278] as well as improved OS for PN compared to RN. However, in some series this held true only for younger patients and/or patients without significant comorbidity at the time of the surgical intervention [279,280]. An analysis of the U.S. Medicare database [281] could not demonstrate an OS benefit for patients ≥ 75 years of age when RN or PN were compared with non-surgical management. Conversely, another series that addressed this question and included Medicare patients, suggested an OS benefit in older patients (75-80 years) when subjected to surgery rather than non-surgical management. Shuch et al., compared patients who underwent PN for RCC with a non-cancer healthy control group via a retrospective database analysis; showing an OS benefit for the cancer cohort [282]. These conflicting results may be an indication that unknown statistical confounders hamper the retrospective analysis of population- based tumour registries. In the only prospectively randomised, but prematurely closed, heavily underpowered, trial, PN seems to be less effective than RN in terms of OS in the intention to treat (ITT) population (HR: 1.50 [95% CI: 1.03–2.16]). However, in the targeted RCC population of the only RCT, the trend in favour of RN was no longer significant [272]. Taken together, the OS advantage suggested for PN vs. RN remains an unresolved issue. Patients with a normal pre-operative renal function and a decreased GFR due to surgical treatment (either RN or PN), generally present with stable long-term renal function [277]. Adverse OS in patients with a pre-existing GFR reduction does not seem to result from further renal function impairment following surgery, but rather from other medical comorbidities causing pre-surgical chronic kidney disease (CKD) [283]. However, in particular in patients with pre-existing CKD, PN is the treatment of choice to limit the risk of development of ESRD which requires haemodialysis. Huang et al., found that 26% of patients with newly diagnosed RCC had an GFR ≤ 60 mL/min, even though their baseline serum creatinine levels were in the normal range [106]. Outcomes 4 & 5: Peri-operative outcomes and quality of lifeIn terms of the intra- and peri-operative morbidity/complications associated with PN vs. RN, the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) randomised trial showed that PN for small, easily resectable, incidentally discovered RCC, in the presence of a normal contralateral kidney, can be performed safely with slightly higher complication rates than after RN [284]. Only a limited number of studies are available addressing quality of life (QoL) following PN vs. RN, irrespective of the surgical approach used (open vs. minimally invasive). Quality of life was ranked higher following PN as compared to RN, but in general patients’ health status deteriorated following both approaches [284,285]. In view of the above, and since oncological safety (CSS and RFS) of PN, so far, has been found non-differing from RN outcomes, PN is the treatment of choice for T1 RCC since it preserves kidney function better and in the long term PN potentially limits the incidence of cardiovascular disorders and development of ESRD and the need for haemodialysis. Irrespective of the available data, in frail patients, treatment decisions should be individualised, weighing the risks and benefits of PN vs. RN, the increased risk of peri-operative complications, and the risk of developing or worsening of CKD post-operatively. 7.1.2.1.2. T2 RCC There is very limited evidence on the optimal surgical treatment for patients with larger renal masses (T2). Some retrospective comparative studies of PN vs. RN for T2 RCC have been published [286]. A trend for lower tumour recurrence- and CSM is reported in PN groups. The estimated blood loss is reported to be higher for PN groups, as is the likelihood of post-operative complications [286]. A multicentre study compared the survival outcomes in patients with larger (> 7 cm) ccRCC treated with PN vs. RN with long-term follow- up (median 102 months). Compared to the RN group, the PN group had a significantly longer median OS (p = 0.014) and median CSS (p = 0.04) [287]. Retrospective comparative studies of cT1 and cT2 RCC patients upstaged to pT3a RCC show contradictory results: some reports suggest similar oncologic outcomes between PN and RN [288], whilst another recent report suggests that PN of clinical T1 in pathologically upstaged pT3a of cT1 RCC is associated with a significantly shorter RFS than RN [289]. Overall, the level of the evidence is low. These studies including T2 masses all have a high risk of selection bias due to imbalance between the PN and RN groups regarding patient’s age, comorbidities, tumour size, stage, and tumour position. These imbalances in covariation factors may have a greater impact on patient outcome than the choice of PN or RN. The Panel’s confidence in the results is limited and the true effects may be substantially different. In view of the above, the risks and benefits of PN should be discussed with patients with T2 tumours. In this setting PN should be considered, if technically feasible, in patients with a solitary kidney, bilateral renal tumours or CKD with sufficient parenchymal volume preserved to allow sufficient post-operative renal function. 7.1.2.1.3. T3 RCC A meta-analysis of nine articles including 1,278 patients with PN and 2,113 patients with RN for pT3a RCC showed no difference in CSS, OS, CSM and RFS, indicating that PN techniques can be used for functional benefits and if technically feasible [290]. 7.1.2.2. Associated procedures 7.1.2.2.1. Adrenalectomy One prospective NRS compared the outcomes of RN with, or without, ipsilateral adrenalectomy [291]. Multivariable analysis showed that upper pole location was not predictive of adrenal involvement, but tumour size was. No difference in OS at five or ten years was seen with, or without, adrenalectomy. Adrenalectomy was justified using criteria based on radiographic- and intra-operative findings. Only 48 of 2,065 patients underwent concurrent ipsilateral adrenalectomy of which 42 of the 48 interventions were for benign lesions [291]. 7.1.2.2.2. Lymph node dissection for clinically negative lymph nodes (cN0) The indication for LN dissection (LND) together with PN or RN is still controversial [292]. The clinical assessment of LN status is based on the detection of an enlargement of LNs either by CT/MRI or intra- operative palpability of enlarged nodes. Less than 20% of suspected metastatic nodes (cN+) are positive for metastatic disease at histopathological examination (pN+) [293]. Both CT and MRI are unsuitable for detecting malignant disease in nodes of normal shape and size [294]. For clinically positive LNs (cN+) see Section 7.2.2. Smaller retrospective studies have suggested a clinical benefit associated with a more or less extensive LND, preferably in patients at high risk for lymphogenic spread. In a large retrospective study, the outcomes of RN with, or without, LND, in patients with high-risk non-mRCC were compared using a propensity score analysis. In this study LND was not significantly associated with a reduced risk of distant metastases, cancer- specific or all-cause mortality. The extent of the LND was not associated with improved oncologic outcomes [295]. The number of LN metastases (< / > 4) as well as the intra- and extra-capsular extension of intra-nodal metastasis correlated with the patients´ clinical prognosis in some studies [294,296-298]. Better survival outcomes were seen in patients with a low number of positive LNs (< 4) and no extra-nodal extension. Based on a retrospective Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) database analysis of > 9,000 patients no effects of an extended LND (eLND) on the disease-specific survival (DSS) of patients with pathologically- confined negative nodes was demonstrated [299]. However, in patients with pathologically proven lymphogenic spread (pN+), an increase of 10 for the number of nodes dissected resulted in a 10% absolute increase in DSS. In addition, in a larger cohort of 1,983 patients, Capitanio et al., demonstrated that eLND results in a significant prolongation of CSS in patients with unfavourable prognostic features (e.g., sarcomatoid differentiation, large tumour size) [300]. As to morbidity related to eLND, a retrospective propensity score analysis from a large single-centre database showed that eLND is not associated with an increased risk of Clavien grade > 3 complications. Furthermore, LND was not associated with length of hospital stay or estimated blood loss [301]. Only one prospective RCT evaluating the clinical value of LND combined with surgical treatment of primary RCC has been published so far. With an incidence of LN involvement of only 4%, the risk of lymphatic spread appears to be very low. Recognising the latter, only a staging effect was attributed to LND [293]. This trial included a very high percentage of patients with pT2 tumours, which are not at increased risk for LN metastases. Only 25% of patients with pT3 tumours underwent a complete LND and the LN template used by the authors was not clearly stated. The optimal extent of LND remains controversial. Retrospective studies suggest that an eLND should involve the LNs surrounding the ipsilateral great vessel and the inter-aortocaval region from the crus of the diaphragm to the common iliac artery. Involvement of inter-aortocaval LNs without regional hilar involvement is reported in up to 35-45% of cases [294,302,303]. At least fifteen LNs should be removed [300,304]. Sentinel LND is an investigational technique [305,306]. 7.1.2.2.3. Embolisation Before routine nephrectomy, tumour embolisation has no benefit [307,308]. In patients unfit for surgery, or with non-resectable disease, embolisation can control symptoms, including visible haematuria or flank pain [309]. These indications will be revisited in Sections 7.2 and 7.3 with cross reference to the summary of evidence and recommendations below. 7.1.2.2.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the treatment of localised RCC Summary of evidenceLEThe oncological outcome in terms of OS following PN equals that of RN in patients with c/p T1 RCC.1bRetrospective studies suggest that oncological outcomes are similar following PN vs. RN in patients with larger (≥ 7 cm) RCC. Post-operative complication rates are higher in PN patients.3bIpsilateral adrenalectomy during RN or PN has no survival advantage in the absence of clinically evident adrenal involvement.3In patients with localised disease without radiographic evidence of LN metastases, a survival advantage of LND in conjunction with RN is not demonstrated in RCTs.2bRetrospective studies suggest a clinical benefit associated with LND in high-risk patients.2bIn patients unfit for surgery with massive haematuria or flank pain, embolisation can be a beneficial palliative approach.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer surgery to achieve cure in localised renal cell cancer.StrongOffer partial nephrectomy (PN) to patients with T1 tumours.StrongOffer PN to patients with T2 tumours and a solitary kidney or chronic kidney disease, if technically feasible.WeakDo not perform ipsilateral adrenalectomy if there is no clinical evidence of invasion of the adrenal gland.StrongDo not offer an extended lymph node dissection to patients with organ-confined disease.WeakOffer embolisation to patients unfit for surgery presenting with massive haematuria or flank pain.Weak 