3.1.10. Immunosuppression after kidney transplantation. The principle underlying successful immunosuppression is ‘the balance of survival’. Practitioners must prescribe a dosage of drug high enough to suppress rejection without endangering the recipient’s health. Increased understanding of immune rejection has led to the development of safe modern immune suppression agents [243,244], which suppress sensitised lymphocyte activity against a transplant. Immunosuppression is particularly important during the initial post-transplant period when there is a high incidence of early post-transplant rejection. In later post-operative stages, ‘graft adaptation‘ occurs, resulting in the very low rejection rates seen in maintenance patients. Rejection prophylaxis should therefore be reduced over time by steroid tapering and gradual lowering of calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) [243-245]. Non-specific side effects of immunosuppression include a higher risk of malignancy and infection, particularly opportunistic infections [243-245]. All immunosuppressants also have dose-dependent specific side effects. Current immunosuppressive protocols aim to reduce drug-specific side effects using a synergistic regimen. A truly synergistic regimen allows profound dose reductions of immunosuppressive drugs; therefore, reducing side effects whilst still maintaining efficacy due to the synergistic effects of the immunosuppressants. The currently recommended standard initial immunosuppression regime provides excellent efficacy with good tolerability [243-246]. It is given to most patients and consists of: calcineurin inhibitors (preferably tacrolimus, alternatively cyclosporine);mycophenolate (MMF or enteric-coated mycophenolate sodium [EC-MPS]);steroids (prednisolone or methylprednisolone);induction therapy (preferably basiliximab in low and standard risk patients and anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) in high-risk patients). This multidrug regimen reflects the current standard of care for the majority of transplant recipients worldwide [243-245] and may be modified according to local needs and immunological risk. This standard regimen is likely to change as new immunosuppressive drugs and new treatment regimens are developed [243-245]. In addition, any initial drug regimen will need to be tailored to the individual needs of a patient as suggested by the appearance of side effects, lack of efficacy or protocol-driven requirements. RecommendationStrength ratingPerform initial rejection prophylaxis with a combination therapy of a calcineurin inhibitor (preferably tacrolimus), mycophenolate, steroids and an induction agent (either basiliximab or anti-thymocyte globulin).Strong 