4.1.3. Diagnostic evaluation. Evaluation of symptoms of OAB follows the general pathway of evaluation of women with LUTS. 4.1.3.1. Bladder diaries Diaries are particularly helpful in establishing and quantifying symptoms of frequency, urgency and UI, and may be valuable in assessing change over time or response to treatment. Several observational studies have demonstrated a close correlation between data obtained from bladder diaries and standard symptom evaluation [39-42]. The optimum number of days required for bladder diaries appears to be based on a balance between accuracy and compliance. Diary duration of three to seven days is routinely used in the literature. For further information, please review Section 3.3. 4.1.3.2. Urodynamics Urodynamics is essential in establishing the presence of DO, but its absence does not preclude diagnosis of OAB, which is based on symptoms alone. A Cochrane review of seven RCTs showed that use of urodynamic tests increased the likelihood of prescribing drugs or avoiding surgery. However, there was no evidence that this influence on decision-making altered the clinical outcome of treatment [77]. A sub-analysis of an RCT comparing fesoterodine to placebo [85] showed that the urodynamic diagnosis of DO was not predictive of treatment response. 4.1.3.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations regarding OAB diagnosis Summary of evidenceLEBladder diaries of three to seven days’ duration may be helpful in quantifying symptoms of OAB and assessing response to treatment.3Urodynamic diagnosis of DO does not influence treatment outcomes in patients with OAB.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingRequest that patients complete at least a three-day bladder diary at initial evaluation for overactive bladder (OAB).StrongDo not routinely carry out urodynamics when offering first-line treatment to patients with uncomplicated OAB symptoms.Strong 4.1.3.4. Urinary biomarkers A SR and meta-analysis indicated that uNGF, BDNF to creatinine ratio and uNGF to creatinine ratio were all increased in female OAB patients compared to healthy controls, whereas no difference was found for the PGE2/Cr and ATP/Cr ratios [115]. The current data is inadequate to assess any other potential biomarkers, in the diagnosis or management of OAB in female patients. 