6.1.2. Seminoma germ cell tumour clinical stage I. Up to 20% of CS I SGCT patients have subclinical metastatic disease, usually in the retroperitoneum, and will relapse after orchidectomy alone [100,101]. Adjuvant treatment decisions should be based on thorough discussions with the patient, incorporating potential risks and benefits, as well as individual patient circumstances, as 80% of unselected CS I SGCT patients are cured by orchidectomy alone. Regardless of management, survival in CS I disease is almost 100% [102]. 6.1.2.1. Surveillance This requires a strict protocol of repeated cross-sectional imaging, monitoring of serum tumour markers and clinical assessment for the early identification of patients experiencing relapse who must receive salvage treatment (See Table 11). Several prospective, non-randomised surveillance studies have been conducted over the past decade. These have shown an overall risk of relapse in unselected CS I patients of 12-20% at five years with 17% in the largest series of over 1,500 patients [103]. Most occur in the retroperitoneum during the first two years [104,105]. According to a SR, active surveillance offers almost identical overall survival as adjuvant management strategies, approaching 100% [102]. The cancer-specific survival (CSS) rate on “active surveillance” (AS) for CS I seminoma is over 99% [103,105,106]. Whilst cost effective compared to other management strategies [107], surveillance can represent a burden to the patient due to the need for repeated imaging of the retroperitoneum and clinic visits. These may negatively impact patient compliance which is crucial to an active surveillance strategy. 6.1.2.2. Adjuvant chemotherapy An RCT comparing one cycle of carboplatin reaching area under curve of 7 mg/mL/min (AUC 7) to adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) showed no difference in relapse-free rates (95% and 96%), time to recurrence and survival after a median follow-up of four years [108]. Adjuvant carboplatin (AUC 7) is therefore an alternative to RT or surveillance in CS I SGCT [108]. Time to relapse after Carboplatin may be longer than with AS, as retrospective data reported a median time to relapse of nineteen months, with 15% of relapses occurring beyond three years. Most patients relapsing after adjuvant carboplatin can be successfully treated by standard, stage-adapted cisplatin-based chemotherapy [109]. In some selected cases, retroperitoneal lymph-node dissection may be adopted in specific protocols (see below). One cycle of adjuvant carboplatin does not seem to have significant long-term toxicities. In a series of 199 CS I SGCT patients, there was no increase in overall mortality, mortality from cardiovascular events and no excess of haematological or non-testicular solid malignancies compared to the general population in the UK [110]. 6.1.2.3. Adjuvant radiotherapy Radiotherapy should generally be reserved for a highly selective group of patients, who would be unsuitable for systemic chemotherapy in the event of relapse. This relates to the toxicity of RT, specifically the long-term risk of non-germ cell malignancies in the radiation field [111-114]. Generally, adjuvant RT should be avoided, particularly in young patients with a long life expectancy. Risk-adapted treatment Prospective trials based on tumour size > 4 cm and stromal rete testis invasion have demonstrated the feasibility of a risk-adapted approach [33-36,115]. A trial of 897 patients offered surveillance to patients with no or one of these two risk factors whilst patients with both risk factors were offered one dose of carboplatin, AUC 7 [36]. At a median follow-up of 5.6 years, the patients without risk factors, 4% of surveillance relapsed compared to 2% after adjuvant carboplatin. With one or both risk factors 15.5% of surveillance patients relapsed vs. 9% receiving adjuvant carboplatin. Thirty-three per cent of relapses after adjuvant carboplatin occurred more than three years after orchidectomy with 3% occurring after five years [36]. 6.1.2.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the treatment of clinical stage I seminoma germ cell tumour of the testis Summary of evidenceLEPatients with CS I SGCT have, in general, a low risk of recurrence2aA combination of tumour size category and rete testis invasion correlate with the risk of relapse at 5 years.2aEvidence and ease of use are limited for a routine use in guiding adjuvant treatment decisions upon risk factors.2aActive surveillance is a feasible approach with conditional relapse risk in unselected series of between 12-20%. Disease-free survival approaches 100% independently of treatment.2aIn patients without conventional risk factors (tumour size < 4 cm and no rete testis invasion), the five-year relapse rate under surveillance is up to 6-8%, respectively; whereas in the presence of one or two risk factors, five-year relapse rate in contemporary surveillance series is 15-20%.2bIn non-randomised prospective series five-year relapse rates with adjuvant carboplatin are 2% in patients without conventional risk factors and 9% in patients with one or both risk factors.2bAdjuvant chemotherapy with one course carboplatin AUC 7 is not inferior to adjuvant radiotherapy when pathological risk factors are considered. Relapse rates with both adjuvant treatments are around 5%.1bAdjuvant radiotherapy is associated with an increased risk of developing secondary non-germ cell malignancies.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingFully inform the patient about all available management options, including surveillance or adjuvant therapy after orchidectomy, as well as treatment-specific recurrence rates and acute and long-term side effects.StrongOffer surveillance as the preferred management option if resources are available and the patient is compliant.StrongOffer one dose of carboplatin at area under curve 7 if adjuvant chemotherapy is considered.StrongDo not perform adjuvant treatment in patients at very low risk of recurrence (no risk factors).StrongDo not routinely perform adjuvant radiotherapy.StrongAdjuvant radiotherapy should be reserved only for highly selected patients not suitable for surveillance and with contraindication for chemotherapy.Strong 