6.1.3. Non-seminomatous germ cell tumours clinical stage I. Management options for CS I NSGCTs include surveillance and adjuvant chemotherapy. Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection has a limited role. Overall, approximately 70% of CS I NSGCTs are cured with orchiectomy alone. In those with the high-risk feature of LVI, historical figures reported relapse in 50% compared to 15% in those without LVI. A thorough discussion should be undertaken with the patient outlining the potential advantages and disadvantages of treatment options, as well as individual co-morbidities, disease features, risk factors, specific circumstances, and personal preferences, to guide their treatment decision. 6.1.3.1. Surveillance Surveillance for CS I NSGCT entails a strict protocol of repeated cross-sectional imaging, monitoring of serum tumour markers and clinical assessment for the early identification of patients experiencing relapse who must receive salvage treatment (See Table 11). The largest reports of surveillance indicate a cumulative relapse risk in about 30% of CS I NSGCT (five-year conditional risk of relapse 42% and 17% for high- and low-risk CS I-NSGCT, respectively) [101,103]. Of these, 92% present within the first two years [101,103,116-118]. 6.1.3.2. Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection Since the introduction of cisplatin-based chemotherapy the role of adjuvant primary retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND) in men with CS I NSGCTs has decreased. According to data from high-volume and expert centres, primary RPLND is associated with a risk of relapse < 15% [119]. More recent data report on a relapse rate of 10% in case of negative nodes (pathologic stage (PS) – I) and < 30% in case of nodal metastases (PS II) [119-121], possibly due to selection or stage migration. The few indications in CS I disease include men with teratoma with somatic malignant component, or patients who are not willing or suitable to undergo chemotherapy in case of recurrence, in particular in those when vascular invasion is present. Recent publication supports the safety of surveillance alone, in PS II disease following RPLND, as 75-80% are relapse free at two and five years [120-122]. Those with relapse can be rescued with standard chemotherapy [123,124]. With PS II, both adjuvant chemotherapy comprising two cycles of (B)EP (except for cases of ppt (post pubertal teratoma) only) and AS are standard option to be discussed with each individual. Strategies to reduce the morbidity of primary RPLND include nerve-sparing and minimally invasive approaches. In a multi-centre setting, higher rates of in-field recurrences and complications have been reported with nerve-sparing RPLND [125,126]. This suggests that primary RPLND, when indicated and chosen, should be performed by an experienced surgeon in a specialist centre. Minimally invasive (laparoscopic or robot-assisted) primary RPLND, appears feasible and safe (e.g., low-complication rate) in experienced hands. This must only be performed in high-volume RPLND centres with appropriate minimal-invasive surgery expertise [127-134]. There is limited recent data on mid-term follow-up. Despite some advantages, including good efficacy, a less-demanding and costly follow-up due to the reduced need for cross-sectional imaging [135], RPLND for CS I NSGCT has diminished its role in view of the high CSS rates of surveillance, the low relapse rates with adjuvant chemotherapy, and the lower reproducibility of primary RPLND on a large scale. 6.1.3.3. Adjuvant chemotherapy Adjuvant chemotherapy has been evaluated with both one and two cycles of BEP (cisplatin, etoposide, bleomycin) in CS I NSGCT. A prospective trial from 1996, as well as subsequent studies, used two cycles of BEP in high-risk patients (LVI present) [136-138]. In these series, including 200 patients, some with a median follow-up of nearly 7.9 years [136], a relapse rate of only 2.7% was reported, with minimal long-term toxicity. Two cycles of cisplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy do not appear to adversely affect fertility or sexual activity [139]. Other studies have shown one cycle of adjuvant BEP results in similar very low recurrence rates (2-3%) [140,141]. Reduction from two to one cycle of BEP improves the risk-benefit ratio of adjuvant chemotherapy considerably. A randomised phase III trial has also compared two-year recurrence free survival with adjuvant BEP x 1 to RPLND. Results favoured chemotherapy with recurrence free survival of 99.5% vs. 91% [126]. No clinically relevant differences in quality of life (QoL) were detected [142]. A community based prospective study of 490 unselected patients with CS I NSGCT that received adjuvant single cycle BEP had five-year relapse rates of 3% and 2% for LVI+ and LV- patients, respectively. After a median follow-up of eight years these rates were sustained, no relapses were observed beyond 3.3 years [140,141]. These numbers imply that > 90% of relapses are prevented by single cycle BEP which is now the recommended strategy if adjuvant chemotherapy is considered [140,141]. The very-long term (> 20 years) side effects of adjuvant chemotherapy, particularly cardiovascular, are yet to be fully defined and this should be considered during shared decision-making [143,144]. Limited data are available on outcomes with relapse after adjuvant BEP. A retrospective analysis indicated that about one third of these relapses were late and that the outcome may be slightly worse compared to those presenting with de novo metastatic disease [145]. 6.1.3.4. Risk-adapted treatment A risk-adapted strategy is an alternative to any single approach for patients with CS I NSGCT. The advantages and disadvantages of treatment options must be discussed with patients in the context of their specific circumstances including disease risk factors, co-morbidities, and personal preference, as well as clinician recommendation in reaching a treatment decision. Lympho-vascular invasion is the strongest and most reproducible predictive factor for relapse and should be carefully outlined to the patient to assist in their decision-making. Patients without LVI should be guided to consider surveillance, although some patients with significant co-morbidities or concerns regarding salvage chemotherapy with multicycle cisplatin-based chemotherapy may opt for adjuvant therapy. Those with LVI should have their high risk of relapse (up to 50%) highlighted and be guided to consider adjuvant management, and chemotherapy with BEP X 1 as the “preferred” option. Some patients may wish to consider primary RPLND although they need to be aware of the potential additional requirement of adjuvant chemotherapy if nodes contain active disease (pN1), as well as the 10% risk of systemic relapse, even if pN0, requiring subsequent chemotherapy treatment (BEP X 3). 6.1.3.5. Post-pubertal teratoma with somatic malignant component A multi-institutional study analysing retrospective datasets of CS I patients with post-pubertal teratoma with somatic malignant component (TSMC) suggested these patients had inferior five-year OS of approximately 10% compared to other CS I GCT patients. Furthermore, CS I TSMC cases undergoing primary RPPLND had a much higher proportion of nodal metastases (PS II) than expected (37.5%). Despite its limitations, this study provides the only evidence on this issue and supports primary RPLND in CS I NSGCT with TSMC [146]. For patients presenting with CS I pure post-pubertal teratoma without a somatic malignant component, surveillance provides comparable survival outcomes to primary RPLND [147]. A mixed population based study on 237 CS I with pure teratoma in the testis, showed an increasing trend favouring surveillance over RPLND as well as a not significant difference in overall survival at a median follow-up of 54 months [147]. However, subtype discrepancies in primary diagnostic of post-pubertal teratoma are not infrequent and consist in addition of subtype and involve secondary somatic type of malignancy in 83% of cases. As such, central review by expert genitourinary pathologist is recommended when teratoma is diagnosed in the orchidectomy specimen [148]. 6.1.3.6. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the treatment of clinical stage I non-seminoma germ cell tumour of the testis Summary of evidenceLELymphovascular invasion increases the risk of relapse.2aThe relapse rate with active surveillance is up to 50%, when LVI is present.2aThe relapse rate in patients who receive adjuvant chemotherapy with BEP (x 1 cycle) is up to 3%.2aAdjuvant chemotherapy with BEP x 1 is superior to adjuvant RPLND in terms of the risk of relapse when the 2 strategies are not centralised in expert centres.1bA risk-adapted approach, based on LVI invasion is feasible.2bThe acute toxicity of one cycle adjuvant BEP is low.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingInform patients about all management options after orchidectomy: surveillance, adjuvant chemotherapy, and retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, including treatment-specific recurrence rates as well as acute and long-term side effects.StrongOffer surveillance or risk-adapted treatment based on lymphovascular invasion (see below).StrongDiscuss one course of cisplatin, etoposide, bleomycin as an adjuvant treatment alternative in patients with stage I non-seminomatous germ cell tumour if patients are not willing to undergo or comply with surveillance.Strong 6.1.3.7. Recommendations for risk-adapted treatment for clinical stage I non-seminomatous germ cell tumour based on vascular invasion RecommendationsStrength ratingStage IA (pT1, no vascular invasion): low riskOffer surveillance if the patient is willing and able to comply.StrongOffer adjuvant chemotherapy with one course of cisplatin, etoposide, bleomycin (BEP) in low-risk patients not willing (or unsuitable) to undergo surveillance.StrongStage IB (pT2-pT4): high riskOffer adjuvant chemotherapy with one course of BEP, or surveillance and discuss the advantages and disadvantages.StrongOffer surveillance to patients not willing to undergo adjuvant chemotherapy.StrongOffer nerve-sparing retroperitoneal lymph node dissection to highly selected patients only; those with contraindication to adjuvant chemotherapy and unwilling to accept surveillance.Strong Figure 1: Risk-adapted treatment in patients with clinical stage I non-seminoma NSGCT* * Discuss all treatment options with individual patients, to allow them to make an informed decision as to their further care.** In case of PS II, the rate of recurrence is higher and chemotherapy can be administered (max. 2 cycles).BEP = cisplatin, etoposide, bleomycin; CS = clinical stage; IGCCCG = International Germ Cell Cancer Collaborative Group; NS = nerve-sparing; RLNPD = retroperitoneal lymph node dissection; VIP = etoposide, cisplatin, ifosfamide. 