5.3.5. Histopathology of radical prostatectomy specimens. 5.3.5.1. Processing of radical prostatectomy specimens Histopathological examination of RP specimens describes the pathological stage, histopathological type, grade and surgical margins of PCa. It is recommended that RP specimens are totally embedded to enable assessment of cancer location, multi-focality and heterogeneity. For cost-effectiveness, partial embedding may also be considered, particularly for prostates >60 g. The most widely accepted method includes complete embedding of the posterior prostate and a single mid-anterior left and right section. Compared with total embedding, partial embedding with this method missed 5% of positive margins and 7% of EPE [254]. The entire RP specimen should be inked upon receipt in the laboratory to demonstrate the surgical margins. Specimens are fixed by immersion in buffered formalin for at least 24 hours, preferably before slicing. After fixation, the apex and the base (bladder neck) are removed and cut into (para)sagittal or radial sections; the shave method is not recommended [99]. The remainder of the specimen is cut in transverse, 3–4 mm sections, perpendicular to the long axis of the urethra. The resultant tissue slices can be embedded and processed as whole-mounts or after quadrant sectioning. Whole-mounts provide better topographic visualisation, faster histopathological examination and better correlation with pre-operative imaging, although they are more time-consuming and require specialist handling. For routine sectioning, the advantages of whole mounts do not outweigh their disadvantages. 5.3.5.2. Radical prostatectomy specimen report The pathology report provides essential information on the prognostic characteristics relevant for clinical decision-making (Table 5.6). As a result of the complex information to be provided for each RP specimen, the use of synoptic(-like) or checklist reporting is recommended. Synoptic reporting results in more transparent and complete pathology reporting [255]. Table 5.3: Mandatory elements provided by the pathology report Histopathological (sub)typeType of carcinoma, e.g., conventional acinar adenocarcinoma, (small cell) neuroendocrine cell carcinoma or ductal carcinomaSubtype and unusual variants, e.g. pleomorphic giant cell or mucinousHistological gradePrimary (predominant) Gleason gradeSecondary Gleason gradeTertiary Gleason grade (if applicable)Global ISUP grade groupApproximate percentage of Gleason grade 4 or 5Tumour quantitation (optional)Percentage of prostate involvedSize/volume of dominant tumour nodulePathological staging (pTNM)If extraprostatic extension is present:indicate whether it is focal or extensive (see Section 5.2.9.4.4);specify sites;indicate whether there is seminal vesicle invasion.If applicable, regional lymph nodes:location;number of nodes retrieved;number of nodes involved.Surgical marginsIf carcinoma is present at the margin:specify sites;extent: focal or extensive (see Section 5.2.9.4.6)(highest) grade at margin.OtherPresence of lymphovascular/angio-invasionLocation of dominant tumourPresence of intraductal carcinoma/cribriform architecture 5.3.5.3. ISUP grade group in prostatectomy specimens Grading of conventional prostatic adenocarcinoma using the Gleason system is the strongest prognostic factor for clinical behaviour and treatment response [100]. The GS is incorporated in nomograms that predict disease-specific survival (DSS) after prostatectomy [256,257]. The ISUP grade group in prostatectomy specimens is determined mostly in a similar way as in biopsies, with a minor exception, i.e. the exclusion of minor (< 5%) high-grade components from the ISUP grade group. For instance, in a carcinoma almost entirely composed of Gleason grade 3 the presence of a minor (< 5%) Gleason grade 4 or 5 component is not included in the GS (ISUP grade group 1), but its presence is commented upon [101]. In case of multi-focality the ISUP grade group of the index lesion i.e. the tumour having the highest grade, stage or volume, is given. 5.3.5.4. Definition of extra-prostatic extension Extra-prostatic extension is defined as carcinoma mixed with peri-prostatic adipose tissue, or tissue that extends beyond the prostate gland boundaries (e.g., neurovascular bundle, anterior prostate). Microscopic bladder neck invasion is considered EPE. It is useful to report the location and extent of EPE because the latter is related to recurrence risk [258]. There are no internationally accepted definitions of focal or microscopic, vs. non-focal or extensive EPE. Some describe focal as a few glands [259] or <1 high-power field in one or at most two sections whereas others measure the depth of extent in millimetres [259]. At the apex of the prostate, tumour mixed with skeletal muscle does not constitute EPE. In the bladder neck, microscopic invasion of smooth muscle fibres is not equated to bladder wall invasion, i.e. not as pT4, because it does not carry independent prognostic significance for PCa recurrence and should be recorded as EPE (pT3a) [260,261]. Stage pT4 is assigned when the tumour invades the bladder muscle wall as determined macroscopically [94]. 5.3.5.5. PCa volume Although PCa volume at RP correlates with tumour grade, stage and surgical margin status, the independent prognostic value of PCa volume has not been established [259,262,263]. Improvement in prostatic radio-imaging allows more accurate pre-operative measurement of cancer volume. Since the independent value of pathological tumour volume at RP has not been established, reporting of the diameter/volume of the dominant tumour nodule, or a rough estimate of the percentage of cancer tissue, is optional [264]. 5.3.5.6. Surgical margin status Surgical margin status is an independent risk factor for BCR. Margin status is positive if tumour cells are in contact with the ink on the specimen surface. Margin status is negative if tumour cells are close to the inked surface [265] or at the surface of the tissue lacking ink. In tissues that have severe crush artefacts, it may not be possible to determine margin status [266]. Surgical margin is separate from pathological stage, and a positive margin is not evidence of EPE [267]. There is evidence for a relationship between margin extent and recurrence risk [268,269]. Some indication must be given of the multi-focality and extent of margin positivity, such as the linear extent in mm of involvement: focal, ≤ 1 mm vs. extensive, > 1 mm [270], or number of blocks with positive margin involvement. Gleason score at the positive margin was found to correlate independently with outcome and should be reported [255,268,271]. 5.3.5.7. Intra-operative assessment of surgical margin status Intra-operative surgical margin assessment can be performed during RP to reduce positive margins and increase neurovascular bundle preservation. A SR reported a 1-15% decrease of positive surgical margins in eight out of ten studies [272]. Intra-operative evaluation of the posterolateral prostatic margin according to the neurovascular structure-adjacent frozen section examination (NeuroSAFE) technique is a systematic way of intra-operative surgical margin evaluation [273]. Non-randomised studies showed that men subjected to NeuroSAFE had lower positive surgical margin rates and more frequently underwent uni- or bilateral nerve-sparing surgery [273-276]. Pending the results on long-term oncological and functional outcome as well as the outcome of the randomised NeuroSAFE PROOF trial, intra-operative frozen section analysis should not be considered standard of care [277]. 