5.7.1. Epidemiology and Pathophysiology. Various definitions of underactive bladder (UAB) and detrusor underactivity (DU) can be identified in the current literature. DU appears as the most consistent concept, is based on urodynamics, and is defined by the International Continence Society as “a contraction of reduced strength and/or duration, resulting in prolonged bladder emptying and/or failure to achieve complete bladder emptying within a normal time span” [17]. Underactive bladder is a terminology that should be reserved for describing symptoms and clinical features related to DU. A tentative definition has been proposed as “a symptom complex suggestive of detrusor underactivity and usually characterized by prolonged urination time with or without a sensation of incomplete bladder emptying, usually with hesitancy, reduced sensation on filling, and a slow stream” [746]. The prevalence of DU in the general population is unknown, as men with DU are either asymptomatic or have non-specific LUTS. In clinical studies of men with non-neurogenic LUTS referred for video-urodynamic studies, the prevalence of DU has been reported to be 10% [747,748] ranging up to 48% in the elderly (≥ 70 years) [749]. Detrusor underactivity is a chronic condition, but its natural history in untreated men has shown a plateau-like course with few symptomatic and urodynamic changes over time [750]. Healthy voluntary bladder muscle contraction requires a functional detrusor muscle, intact efferent and afferent innervation, and integrated central neural control mechanisms. Dysfunction of any of these essential components can lead to DU, which may be the consequence of various pathological processes, suggesting a multifactorial pathophysiology. Neurogenic. Neurogenic DU may be the consequence of peripheral or central nervous system disease. This aetiology is covered in the EAU Guidelines on Neuro-Urology [751]. Myogenic. Several conditions can affect the myocytes or their extracellular matrix, resulting in attenuated detrusor contraction. Bladder outflow obstruction and diabetic cystopathy are common causes of myogenic DU. However, many aspects of the pathophysiology of myogenic DU that relate to BOO and diabetic cystopathy are mainly based on animal studies and the clinical picture in any individual patient is probably multifactorial in nature [752,753]. Some SRs have addressed the role of chronic BOO on bladder dysfunction in humans. Aside from the impact on smooth muscle cells, multiple other consequences were identified including modifications on the extracellular matrix, and damage to the urothelium, suburothelium and bladder innervation. To date, BOO-related DU pathophysiology remains poorly understood [754]. Iatrogenic. Patients may experience DU following pelvic surgery (e.g., radical prostatectomy or extended rectal surgery) and/or radiation therapy [752]. Pharmacological treatments (e.g., drugs with anticholinergic effects or opioids) may also be involved in the impairment of detrusor contractility [752]. Idiopathic. Given the higher prevalence of DU in the elderly, it has been hypothesised that ageing would be a major contributor. However, available data do not provide strong evidence to support the assertion that detrusor contractile function declines with common ageing [752]. 