5.7.3. Conservative management. In general, the treatment of UAB should focus on symptom relief, avoiding complications (such as infections) and improving or at least maintaining QoL. It involves a pragmatic approach ensuring timely bladder drainage by trying to improve bladder contraction and/or decrease urethral resistance [763]. 5.7.3.1. Behavioural interventions There are no randomised studies or large high-quality studies available investigating the effect of behavioural interventions in male patients with UAB. The main goal is to reduce bothersome symptoms and prevent complications of incomplete bladder emptying (such as recurrent UTI) while avoiding invasive treatments. Asymptomatic patients at risk of UAB should be informed of this, (like diabetes mellitus or after pelvic surgery/radiotherapy) as diagnosis is delayed due to loss in bladder sensation and enlarged bladder capacity. In patients with sensory impairment, timed or scheduled voiding schemes can be recommended. In patients with bothersome frequency, double or triple voiding as well as Valsalva or the Credé maneuver can reduce PVR and may improve their symptoms however no clinical trial has proven efficacy or harm of these measures in the non-neurogenic male population. A descriptive cohort investigated male patients with DU started on conservative treatment (not further defined) and the need for clean intermittent catheterisation (CIC) after five years. They concluded that male patients with non-neurological DU can remain stable without the need to initiate CIC. No urodynamic risk factors for CIC were detected [767]. 5.7.3.2. Pelvic floor muscle relaxation training with biofeedback Successful voiding is initiated by relaxation of the pelvic floor and urinary sphincter. A failure of at least one of these mechanisms can result in voiding dysfunction as well as inhibition of detrusor contraction, which is called the guarding reflex [768]. Therefore, physiotherapy with pelvic floor muscle relaxation is usually a first line therapy for voiding dysfunction but no RCT in male adults investigates its effect on UAB. Evidence is derived mostly from paediatric studies. One RCT in children compared the effect of standard urotherapy (diet, adapted fluid intake and timed voiding + toilet training) with animated biofeedback therapy versus urotherapy alone in children with proven DU. Improvement was seen in PVR, recurrent UTI and urodynamic parameters, like flow curve and maximum flow rate, in both treatment groups, but improvement was significantly better at all stages in children receiving biofeedback [769]. 5.7.3.3. Clean intermittent self-catheterisation (see section 5.6.3.1.4) In patients with persistently elevated PVR, clean intermittent catheterisation (CIC) is the preferred method for complete and timely bladder drainage. No data exist on the maximum accepted PVR but after 300 mls the risk of UTIs increases [770]. Clean intermittent self-catheterisation is preferred over indwelling catheters, as it might reduce the risk of complications like UTI, bacterial colonisation, bladder stones and overflow incontinence. However, this technique demands a certain level of manual dexterity and cognition if performed by individuals themselves or it can be performed by a caregiver or second person, for example a partner. More details can be found in section 5.6.3.1.4. 5.7.3.4. Indwelling catheters Indwelling catheters should be avoided in the long-term unless other treatment options are not indicated, and the patient is unwilling or unable to perform CIC and there is no one else that can perform it for them. In this case, suprapubic catheters are preferred over urethral catheters due to the risk of traumatic hypospadias [620]. For further details see section 5.6.3.1.4. 5.7.3.5. Intravesical electrical stimulation Intravesical electrotherapy (IVES) is an electrical stimulation technique that stimulates the A-delta mechanoreceptor afferents thereby reinforcing bladder contractions. Therapy consists of daily sessions of stimulation with ten to fifteen sessions considered as a trial period. Afferent circuits should be intact together with a healthy detrusor muscle. A recently published RCT in a mixed-gender population with neurogenic predominant UAB, reported improvement at four weeks after IVES compared to sham in PVR (-97ml vs. -10.5ml, p < 0.01), in bladder voiding efficiency (+13.3 vs. 0.0, p<0.01) and in Qmax (+1.3 vs. +0.2, p < 0.04) [771]. One small retrospective study with a mixed population (eleven women - five men) showed some improvement in voiding after IVES in two-third of the study population [772]. Other evidence is mainly derived from small studies in children [755] 5.7.3.6. Extracorporeal Shock Wave Therapy Extracorporeal Shock Wave therapy (ESWT) improves neovascularisation and tissue regeneration and theoretically could improve detrusor contractility. A small placebo controlled-RCT reported significant improvements in PVR and UAB-Q scores at 4th week but not at 12th week of follow up [773,774]. Summary of evidenceLEBehavioural interventions can be attempted in men with UAB and high PVR. Avoid increasing intrabdominal pressure, with Valsalva or Credé, in those with poorly compliant bladders.3Pelvic floor muscle relaxation techniques can help with voiding dysfunction.4Clean intermittent catheterisation is first line therapy in men with UAB and high PVR over 300ml.3Indwelling catheters (urethral or suprapubic) are associated with a range of complications as well as an enhanced risk of UTI.3If indwelling catheters are the treatment choice, then the suprapubic route is favoured over urethral due to risk of traumatic hypospadias.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingInitiate clean intermittent self-catheterisation if there is risk of upper tract damage or PVR is > 300ml.WeakOffer indwelling transurethral catheterisation or suprapubic cystostomy only when other modalities for urinary drainage have failed or are unsuitable.Weak 