5.7.2. Diagnostic Evaluation. 5.7.2.1. Medical history and physical examination A review of medical history, including co-morbidities and current medications, can identify potential causes of UAB. The history should also include a thorough evaluation of LUTS, which should be classified into storage, voiding and post-micturition symptoms. There is no pivotal symptom to identify patients with UAB. The clinical presentation ranges from asymptomatic cases to symptomatic chronic urinary retention. Since UAB is a disorder of the voiding phase, voiding symptoms are to be the predominant ones, but they may be associated with storage symptoms, particularly in case of incomplete bladder emptying or other concomitant bladder dysfunctions [755]. Clinical diagnosis is even more difficult when patients have other conditions that may affect the presentation of LUTS, such as known or suspected BOO/BPO. In this setting, there is no validated tool to ascertain the respective roles of DU and BOO on voiding symptoms. The Bristol group was the first to attempt to identify systematically which of the LUTS are most closely related to UAB [756]. Men with UAB reported a statistically significantly higher occurrence of decreased and/or interrupted urinary stream, hesitancy, feeling of incomplete bladder emptying, palpable bladder, feeling of incomplete bowel emptying, absent and/or decreased sensation, and always straining to void compared with men with normal pressure-flow studies. Several authors have proposed predictive models based on the patient’s LUTS to distinguish individuals with an UAB from patients with normal pressure-flow studies or BOO [757,758]. However, there is no conclusive evidence that one prognostic model is more accurate than another, and there is no published external validation of these models. 5.7.2.2. Questionnaires There is no specific validated questionnaire for the diagnosis of UAB. Physicians can refer to validated questionnaires for male LUTS, but their clinical benefit to monitor symptom changes and treatment in patients with UAB is uncertain [759]. 5.7.2.3. Uroflowmetry Some authors have proposed to distinguish UAB from BOO based on uroflowmetry parameters, not only on Qmax, but on flow patterns and combinations of scores [760,761]. The diagnostic accuracy of the developed models remains to be established and external validation is lacking. 5.7.2.4. Ultrasound scan and post-void residual measurement Ultrasound findings have been evaluated as non-invasive predictors of DU. In a single-centre prospective study including 143 adult males with LUTS, detrusor wall thickness ≤ 1.23 mm and bladder capacity > 445 mL was associated with urodynamically proven DU, with sensitivity and specificity of 42% and 100%, respectively [762]. Detrusor underactivity is often associated with prolonged bladder emptying time and/or post-void residual urine. However, while high PVR value have been associated with presence of DU, no consensus cut-off has been identified to diagnose DU and it is unlikely that one will ever exist [763]. 5.7.2.5. Urodynamics Underactive bladder is a clinical diagnosis based on sign and symptoms and DU is a term that should be reserved for a urodynamic diagnosis [764]. Invasive urodynamics is the only widely accepted method for diagnosing DU [755]. However, current data do not allow for a consensus definition of the urodynamic criteria to be used for the diagnosis of DU. Three algorithms, which are all based on computer-urodynamic investigation and quantification of detrusor pressure during voiding, have been suggested to quantify detrusor power [763]: Griffiths’ Watt factor: quantification of detrusor power with a formula consisting of detrusor pressure during voiding, contraction speed, and bladder volume at each point of micturition, expressed as W/m2. Detrusor power varies during voiding, single calculations are usually offered on urodynamic evaluation sheets, for example, maximum detrusor power (Wmax) or detrusor power at maximum flow (WQmax). However, it remains controversial which of the calculations and what threshold value should be used. Expert opinion suggested using a Wmax threshold value of 7.0 W/m2 [763].Schafer’s detrusor-adjusted mean PURR factor (DAMPF): detrusor power can grossly be quantified as very weak, weak, normal, or strong if linearised passive urethral resistance (linPURR) is drawn into the Schafer nomogram. The length of linPURR determines detrusor strength.Bladder contractility index (BCI): quantification of detrusor power/contractility can be derived from Schafer’s linPURR lines and calculated by the formula: BCI=pdetQmax + 5Qmax. BCI>150 describes strong contractility, 100-150 normal contractility, and <100 weak contractility. Currently the BCI is the most widely used in the literature and clinical trials. None of these models are validated and their concordance for the diagnosis of DU is uncertain [765,766], preventing a consensus to be reached on the optimal method for diagnosing DU. Furthermore, detrusor contraction strength is only one aspect of voiding efficiency, and future models will need to encompass several aspects of assessing detrusor contraction (e.g., strength, durability) as well as how the bladder empties. 