5.7.4. Pharmacological management. 5.7.4.1. Parasympathomimetics For the mechanism of action of parasympathomimetics, see section 5.2.3. A SR and meta-analysis were performed in both male and female patients with UAB evaluating twelve RCTs on the use of both subgroups (muscarinic agonists and acetylcholinesterase inhibitors) of parasympathomimetics [775,776]. The meta-analysis showed a small benefit in some patients with (post-procedure) urinary retention with no increase in adverse events, but without improvement of PVR. However, the results of this SR are confounded by the low number of small studies, weak data, high heterogeneity and a very short-term follow up. Therefore, based upon the available literature, no strong evidence-based conclusions can be drawn on the role of parasympathomimetics as an effective pharmaceutical treatment for UAB. 5.7.4.2. Alpha-adrenergic blockers One alternative to improve bladder emptying and micturition is by reducing outflow resistance in patients with UAB. Although there is a lack of high quality RCTs, some evidence exists that lowering outflow resistance improves voiding functions and bothersome symptoms in men with UAB. A single-blind prospective RCT investigated 119 patients with UAB treating them with a cholinergic drug, an alpha-adrenergic blocker or both. They showed both a significant improvement in symptoms as well as PVR and flow rate in patients treated with combination therapy compared to monotherapy [777]. A study evaluated the effects of tadalafil (a PDE5 inhibitor) and silodosin on voiding function in male patients with non-neurogenic DU. After propensity score matching, they showed improvement of both QoL and UDS parameters and voiding parameters in both subgroups [757]. Overall, the clinical rigor required to provide evidence‐based support for the use of this class of medications in treating UAB is still lacking. 5.7.4.3. Prostaglandins Prostaglandins are involved in the modulation of bladder function. There are five subtypes, of which prostaglandins E2 and F2a appear to be predominant in stimulating detrusor contractions. A Cochrane review analysing three RCTs using intravesical instillation of PGE2 and PGF2a, suggests a reduction of postoperative retention after catheter removal [778]. However due to methodological limitations of the included trials, the use in clinical practice remains uncertain. One placebo-controlled trial investigated the combination of intravesical PGE2 with bethanechol chloride in nineteen patients with UAB [779]. Although they showed a reduction in PVR compared to placebo, clinical relevance is questioned. Overall, the efficacy of the prostaglandin agents in treating UAB is not established. 5.7.4.4. Other drugs As previously stated, treatment with PDE5 inhibitors (such as tadalafil) showed improvement of both QoL and UDS parameters and voiding parameters in male patients with UAB [757]. For more information on PDE5s, please see section 5.2.5. Summary of evidenceLEEvidence on the effect of parasympathomimetics on clinical or urodynamic parameters of UAB is lacking. Possible serious adverse effects should be considered before administration.4There is limited evidence about effectiveness of alpha-adrenergic blockers in men with UAB.4The efficacy of the prostaglandin agents in treating UAB is not established.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not routinely recommend parasympathomimetics for treatment of men with underactive bladder.StrongOffer alpha-adrenergic blockers before more-invasive techniques.Weak 