7.3.2. Local therapy of metastases in metastatic RCC. A SR of the local treatment of metastases from RCC in any organ was undertaken [507]. Interventions included metastasectomy, various radiotherapy modalities, and no local treatment. The outcomes assessed were OS, CSS and PFS, local symptom control and AEs. A risk-of-bias assessment was conducted [508]. Of the 2,235 studies identified only sixteen non-randomised comparative studies were included. Data were too heterogeneous to meta-analyse. There was considerable variation in the type and distribution of systemic therapies (cytokines and VEGF-inhibitors) and in reporting the results. A subsequent SR did not change the quality of evidence [509]. 7.3.2.1. Complete versus no/incomplete metastasectomy A SR, including only eight studies, compared complete vs. no and/or incomplete metastasectomy of RCC metastases in various organs [510-517]. In one study complete resection was achieved in only 45% of the metastasectomy cohort, which was compared with no metastasectomy [517]. Non-surgical modalities were not applied. Six studies [511-513,515-517] reported a significantly longer median OS or CSS following complete metastasectomy (the median value for OS or CSS was 40.75 months, range 23-122 months) compared with incomplete and/or no metastasectomy (the median value for OS or CSS was 14.8 months, range 8.4-55.5 months). Of the two remaining studies, one [510] showed no significant difference in CSS between complete and no metastasectomy, and one [514] reported a longer median OS for metastasectomy albeit no p-value was provided. 7.3.2.2. Local therapies for RCC bone metastases Of the three studies identified, one compared single-dose image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) with hypofractionated IGRT in patients with RCC bone metastases [518]. Single-dose IGRT (> 24 Gy) had a significantly better 3-year actuarial local PFS rate, also shown by Cox regression analysis. Another study compared metastasectomy/curettage and local stabilisation with no surgery of solitary RCC bone metastases in various locations [519]. A significantly higher five-year CSS rate was observed in the intervention group. After adjusting for prior nephrectomy, gender and age, multivariable analysis still favoured metastasectomy/ curettage and stabilisation. A third study compared the efficacy and durability of pain relief between single- dose stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) and conventional radiotherapy in patients with RCC bone metastases to the spine [520]. Pain, ORR, time-to-pain relief and duration of pain relief were similar. 7.3.2.3. Local therapies for RCC brain metastases Two studies on RCC brain metastases were included. A three-arm study compared stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) vs. whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) vs. SRS and WBRT [521]. Each group was further subdivided into recursive partitioning analysis (RPA) classes I to III (I favourable, II moderate and III poor patient status). Two- year OS and intra-cerebral control were equivalent in patients treated with SRS alone and SRS plus WBRT. Both treatments were superior to WBRT alone in the general study population and in the RPA subgroup analyses. A comparison of SRS vs. SRS and WBRT in a subgroup analysis of RPA class I showed significantly better 2-year OS and intra-cerebral control for SRS plus WBRT based on only three participants. The other study compared fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy (FSRT) with metastasectomy and conventional radiotherapy or conventional radiotherapy alone [522]. Several patients in all groups underwent alternative surgical and non-surgical treatments after initial treatment. One-, two- and three-year survival rates were higher but not significantly so for FSRT as for metastasectomy and conventional radiotherapy, or conventional radiotherapy alone. Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy did not result in a significantly better two-year local control rate compared with metastasectomy plus conventional radiotherapy. Stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) with a median physical dose of 20 (18-30) Gy and a biologically effective dose (DED10) of 63.3 (45-125) Gy in a median (range) of 1 (1-6) fractions for 1-5 brain metastases were safe also during ICI and targeted therapy [479]. Targeted therapy was paused only in one-third of patients for 2-21 days. Local control at all sites, including extracranial, was 75% at one year. After one year, 62% of patients remained on the same systemic therapy as at the time of SRT, which was more frequent for ICI therapy as compared to targeted therapy (83% vs. 36%; p = 0.035). No grade IV or V toxicity was observed. 7.3.2.4. Embolisation of metastases Embolisation prior to resection of hypervascular bone or spinal metastases can reduce intra-operative blood loss [174]. In selected patients with painful bone or paravertebral metastases, embolisation can relieve symptoms [175] (see recommendation Section 7.1.2.2.4). 7.3.2.5. Stereotactic radiotherapy in oligo-recurrent and oligo-progressive metastases Sterotatic radiotherapy has been used in oligoprogression (i.e. limited number of metastasis in progression, while other sites are controlled under systemic therapy) and in oligonmetastatic recurrences. Two SRs of single arm studies have been conducted [523,524]. The non comparative nature of the studies included in both SR does not allow to definate conclusions. A retrospective analysis of 207 patients with oligo-recurrent and oligo-progressive lesions in mainly bones and lungs with or without systemic therapy (mainly targeted therapy) demonstrated two-year local control rate of 78.3% (95% CI: 72.5-83.0). One, two and three-year local control rates were 89.4%, 80.1% and 76.6% in oligo-recurrent patients, and 82.7%, 76.9% and 64.3% in those with oligo-progressive disease, respectively. Median applied biologically effective dose (BED) 10 was 60 Gy. Median time to subsequent systemic therapy was 13.9 months and median PFS was 37.9 months. No grade III or higher toxicities were reported [525]. Similar results in oligo-progressive mRCC has been reported in a single-arm prospective study including 37 patients with IMDC favourable- and intermediate risk where one-year local control of the irradiated lesions was 93% (95% CI: 71-98%) and median time to change in systemic TKI therapy was 12.6 months (95% CI: 9.6-17.4 months). Median therapy prior to study entry was 18.6 months and therapy was discontinued during SRT. The median BED10 was 72 Gy, corresponding to a SRT dose of 40 Gy in 5 fractions. Median PFS was 9.3 months and there were no reported grade III acute or late toxicities [526]. Several RCTs with SBRT in oligometastatic setting are ongoing. 7.3.2.6. Adjuvant treatment in cM0 patients after metastasectomy Patients after metastasectomy and no evidence of disease (cM0) have a high risk of relapse. Recent attempts to reduce RFS in randomised prospective phase II trials of sorafonib and pazopanib after metastasectomy did not demonstrate an improvement in RFS [176,177]. KEYNOTE-564 included a small percentage of patients who were treated by nephrectomy and complete metastasectomy within one year after primary diagnosis (6% in the experimental arm and 6% in the placebo arm) [483,484]. A metachronous interval of < 1 year for recurrences following surgery with curative intent is a poor prognostic factor by IMDC classification [[267,527]. Systemic therapy based on immune combinations has stronger levels of evidence than surgery in this intermediate/advanced disease setting [528]. Also, TKI- driven adjuvant trials after metastasectomy have shown no DFS or OS benefit [176,177]. Results for single-agent pembrolizumab post-surgery for metastatic disease are therefore difficult to interpret due to the small subgroup. Nevertheless, the DFS HR of 0.29 (95% CI: 0.12-0.69) in favour of resection of M1 to NED plus pembrolizumab shows that patients with subclinical, but progressive, disease who were subjected to metastasectomy had a benefit of adjuvant systemic therapy with pembrolizumab. Based on the current data it cannot be concluded that for patients with oligo-progressive disease, metastasectomy within the first year of initial diagnosis of the primary and subsequent adjuvant pembrolizumab is superior to a period of observation and dual IO-based combination first-line therapy upon progression. Data from the TKI era suggest that patients with oligometastatic disease recurrence can be observed for up to a median of sixteen months before systemic therapy is required and that this practice is common in real-world settings (30%) [529,530]. In addition, it is possible that metastasectomy may lead to poorer outcomes compared to systemic therapy approaches as a relapse within the first twelve months and presentation with synchronous (oligo- metastatic disease is attributed to the IMDC intermediate risk-group. The Panel therefore does not encourage metastasectomy and adjuvant pembrolizumab in this population with recurrent disease within one year after primary surgery. A careful reassessment of disease status to rule out rapid progressive disease should be performed. Data from another adjuvant ICI study with the PD-L1 inhibitor atezolizumab (IMmotion010) also included an M1 NED subgroup which showed no DFS advantage [485]. This result underscores the need for caution in the treatment of the M1 NED subgroup. 7.3.2.7. Summary of evidence and recommendations for local therapy of metastases in metastatic RCC Summary of evidenceLERetrospective comparative studies point towards a benefit of complete metastasectomy in mRCC patients in terms of OS, CSS and delay of systemic therapy.3A single-arm prospective and retrospective study support that oligometastases can be observed for up to 16 months before systemic therapy is required due to progression.2aRadiotherapy to bone and brain metastases from RCC can induce significant relief from local symptoms (e.g. pain).3Tyrosine kinase inhibitors treatment after metastasectomy in patients with no evidence of disease did not improve RFS when compared to placebo or observation.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingTo control local symptoms, offer ablative therapy, including metastasectomy, to patients with metastatic disease and favourable disease factors and in whom complete resection is achievable.WeakOffer stereotactic radiotherapy for clinically relevant bone- or brain metastases for local control and symptom relief.WeakDo not offer tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment to mRCC patients after metastasectomy and no evidence of disease.StrongPerform a confirmatory axial scan of disease status prior to metastasectomy to rule out rapid progressive metastatic disease which requires systemic treatment.WeakBefore initiating systemic therapy for oligometastases that cannot be resected, discuss with your patient a period of observation until progression is confirmed.Weak 