4.8.4. Management of fistula. 4.8.4.1. Management of vesico-vaginal fistula 4.8.4.1.1. Conservative management 4.8.4.1.1.1. Spontaneous closure The reported spontaneous closure rate is 13 ± 23% [694], although this applies largely to small fistulae (< 1 cm) [668,695]. Hence, immediate management is usually by urinary catheterisation or diversion; however, within the first two weeks following fistula occurrence, delayed surgical exploration and repair can be planned. 4.8.4.1.1.2. Pharmacotherapy Several case reports describe a successful fistula closure rate following the induction of amenorrhoea by oestrogen, oestrogen/progesterone combinations or luteinising hormone releasing hormone analogues specifically for small (< 7 mm), uretero- or vesico-uterine fistulae following caesarean section [696-702]. One RCT comparing the efficacy of using fibrin glue compared to Martius flap inter-positioning (n = 14; < 4 cm and n = 5; > 5 cm) did not report significantly different outcomes between the two types of treatment but the closure rates were relatively low in both groups (68.4% vs. 57.9%) [703]. 4.8.4.1.1.3. Palliation and skin care During the intervening period between diagnosis and repair, UI pads with the aim of prevention of skin complications related to chronic urinary leakage can be provided and the use of a barrier cream or local oestrogen can also be considered [704,705]. 4.8.4.1.2. Surgical management Overall closure rates after surgical repair of vesico-vaginal fistulae range from 58-100% [706]. 4.8.4.1.2.1. Timing of surgery Findings from small uncontrolled case series suggest no difference in success rates for early (within four weeks) or delayed (after three months) closure of VVF [707,708]. 4.8.4.1.2.2. Surgical approaches Vaginal procedures There are two main types of closure techniques applied to the repair of urinary fistulae, the classical saucerisation/partial colpocleisis [694] and the more commonly used dissection and repair in layers or flap-splitting technique [709]. There are no data comparing their outcomes. Abdominal procedures There are no RCTs comparing abdominal and vaginal approaches. Repair by the abdominal route is indicated when high fistulae are fixed at the vaginal vault and are inaccessible via a vaginal approach. A transvesical repair has the advantage of being entirely extraperitoneal. A simple transperitoneal repair is used less often although it is favoured by some using the laparoscopic approach. A combined transperitoneal and transvesical procedure may be utilised for fistula repair following caesarean section. Results of secondary and subsequent repairs are not as successful as the initial repair [710]. Laparoscopic and robotic procedures Small series (single figures) have reported using these techniques, but while laparoscopic repair is feasible with and without robotic assistance, no series to date have compared outcomes with alternative surgical approaches. Trimming of fistula edge A single RCT compared trimming of the fistula edge with no trimming. There was no difference in success rates but failed repairs in trimmed cases had larger recurrences than untrimmed cases, which were smaller [711]. Tissue interposition Tissue flaps are often added as an additional layer of repair during VVF surgery. Most commonly, such flaps are utilised in the setting of recurrence after a prior attempt at repair, for VVF related to previous radiotherapy (described later), ischaemic or obstetric fistulae, large fistulae, and finally those associated with a difficult or tenuous closure due to poor tissue quality. However, there is no high-level evidence that the use of such flaps improves outcomes for either complicated or uncomplicated VVF. Postoperative management There is no high-level evidence to support any particular practice in postoperative management, but most reported series used catheter drainage for > 10 days and longer periods in complex or radiation-associated fistulae (up to three weeks). The performance of postoperative cystography prior to catheter removal can theoretically miss a persistent fistula if not done with a micturition phase or if the fistula is located at the bladder neck. 4.8.4.1.3. Management of complications of vesico-vaginal fistulae The complications of VVF repair are varied and can include: Persistence or recurrence of fistula;Persistence or recurrence of UI;Persistence of LUTS or occurrence of new LUTS, including de novo OAB and/or SUI;Infections: wound and UTIs/urosepsis;Ureteric obstruction (ligation, fibrosis or injury);Bladder outlet obstruction (meatal stenosis, urethral stricture or bladder neck obstruction);Bladder contracture;Vaginal stenosis;Sexual dysfunction (vaginismus/dyspareunia);Rare complications (granulomas/diverticulum formation);Neurological complications (foot drop/neurogenic bladder);Psychological trauma (social isolation/divorce/mental illness);Infertility. The literature on the treatment and management of complications of fistula repairs is scarce and is mostly experienced based. It is impossible to provide any specific evidence-based guidance. 4.8.4.2. Management of radiation fistulae Modified surgical techniques are often required, and indeed, where the same techniques have been applied to both surgical and post-radiation fistulae, the results from the latter have been consistently poorer [712]. Due to the wide field abnormality surrounding many radiotherapy-associated fistulae, approaches include permanent urinary and/or faecal diversion [712,713] or preliminary urinary and faecal diversion, with later undiversion in selected cases following reconstruction. In cases where life expectancy is deemed to be short, ureteric occlusion and nephrostomy insertion might be more appropriate. 4.8.4.3. Management of ureteric fistulae Patients at higher risk of ureteric injury require experienced surgeons who can identify and protect the ureter and its blood supply to prevent injury and recognise injury promptly. Immediate repair of any intraoperative injury should be performed by observing the principles of debridement, adequate blood supply and tension-free anastomosis with internal drainage using stents [714]. Delayed presentation of UUT injury should be suspected in patients whose recovery after relevant abdominal or pelvic surgery is slower than expected, if there is any fluid leak, and if there is any unexpected dilatation of the pelvicalyceal system. While there is no evidence to support the use of one surgical approach over another, there is consensus that repair should adhere to the standard principles of tissue repair and safe anastomosis and be undertaken by an experienced team. Conservative management is possible with internal or external drainage, endoluminal management using nephrostomy and stenting where available, and early (< 2 weeks) or delayed (> 3 months) surgical repair when required [715]. Functional and anatomical imaging should be used to follow-up patients after repair to guard against development of ureteric stricture and deterioration in renal function. Uretero-vaginal fistula occurring in the early postoperative phase predominantly after hysterectomy is the most frequent presentation of UUT fistulae in urological practice. An RCT in 3,141 women undergoing open or laparoscopic gynaecological surgery found that prophylactic insertion of ureteric stents made no difference to the low risk (1%) of ureteric injury [716]. Endoscopic management is sometimes possible by retrograde stenting, percutaneous nephrostomy and antegrade stenting if there is pelvicalyceal dilatation, or ureteroscopic realignment [717]. However, the long-term success rate is unknown. Antegrade endoluminal distal ureteric occlusion combined with nephrostomy tube diversion often palliates urinary leakage due to malignant fistula in the terminal phase [718]. If endoluminal techniques fail or result in secondary stricture, the abdominal approach to repair is standard and may require end-to-end anastomosis, reimplantation into the bladder using psoas hitch or Boari flap, or replacement with bowel segments with or without reconfiguration. As a last resort, nephrectomy may be considered, particularly in the context of a poorly functioning kidney and an otherwise normal contralateral kidney [719-723]. 4.8.4.3.1. Management of urethro-vaginal fistulae 4.8.4.3.1.1. Aetiology Although urethro-vaginal fistulae are rare, most of them in adults have an iatrogenic aetiology. Causes include surgical treatment of SUI with bulking agents or synthetic slings, surgery for urethral diverticulum and genital reconstruction. Irradiation and even conservative treatment of prolapse with pessaries can lead to formation of fistulae. 4.8.4.3.1.2. Diagnostic evaluation Clinical vaginal examination, including the three-swab test, is often sufficient to diagnose urethro-vaginal fistulae. Urethroscopy and cystoscopy can be performed to assess the extent and location of the fistulae. In cases of difficult diagnosis, VCUG or US can be useful. An 3D-MRI or CT scan is becoming utilised more widely to clarify anatomy [724,725]. 4.8.4.3.1.3. Surgical management Choice of surgery will depend on the size, localisation, and aetiology of the fistula and the amount of tissue loss. Principles of reconstruction include identifying the fistula, creation of a plane between the vaginal wall and urethra, watertight closure of the urethral wall, eventual interposition of tissue, and closure of the vaginal wall. One case series reported that a vaginal approach yielded a success rate of 70% at first attempt and 92% at second attempt, and that an abdominal approach only led to successful closure in 58% of cases [726]. A vaginal approach required less operating time, had less blood loss and shorter hospitalisation. Most authors have described surgical principles that are identical to those of VVF repair, and primary closure rates of 53–95.4% have been described. A series of 71 women, treated for urethro-vaginal fistulae reported that 90.1% of fistulae were closed at the first vaginal intervention. Additionally, 7.4% were closed during a second vaginal intervention. Despite successful closure, SUI developed in 52% of cases. Stress urinary incontinence patients were treated with synthetic or autologous slings and nearly 60% became dry and an additional 32% improved. Urethral obstruction occurred in 5.6% and was managed by urethral dilation or urethrotomy [727]. 4.8.4.3.1.4. Flaps and neo-urethra The simplest flap is a vaginal advancement flap to cover the urethral suture line. Labial tissue can be harvested as a pedicled skin flap. This labial skin can be used as a patch to cover the urethral defect but can also be used to create a tubular neo-urethra [728,729]. The construction of a neo-urethra has mostly been described in traumatic aetiologies. In some cases, a transpubic approach has been used [730]. The numbers of patients reported are small and there are no data on the long-term outcome of fistula closure and continence rates. The underlying bulbo-cavernosus tissue can be incorporated in the pedicled flap and probably offers better vascularisation and more bulking to the repair. This could allow a safer placement of a sling afterwards, in those cases where bothersome SUI would occur postoperatively [731,732]. 4.8.4.3.1.5. Martius flap In obstetrical fistula repair, the Martius labial bulbocavernosus muscle/fat flap was not found to have any benefit. However, the Martius flap is still considered by some to be an important adjunctive measure in the treatment of genitourinary fistulae for which additional bulking with well-vascularised tissue is needed [733]. The series of non-obstetrical aetiology are small and all of them are retrospective. There are no prospective data, nor randomised studies [734]. The indications for Martius flap in the repair of urethra-vaginal fistulae remain unclear. 4.8.4.3.1.6. Rectus muscle flap Rectus abdominis muscle flaps have been described by some authors [735,736]. 4.8.4.3.1.7. Alternative approaches An alternative retropubic retro-urethral technique has been described by Koriatim [737]. This approach allows a urethro-vesical flap tube to be fashioned to form a continent neo-urethra. 4.8.4.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of urinary fistula Summary of evidenceLESpontaneous closure of surgical fistulae does occur and appears more likely for small fistulae although it is not possible to establish the rate with any certainty.3There is no evidence that the timing of repair makes a difference to the chances of successful closure of a fistula.3There is no high-quality evidence of differing success rates for repair of VVFs by vaginal, abdominal, transvesical, and transperitoneal approaches.3A variety of interpositional grafts can be used in either abdominal or vaginal procedures, although there is little evidence to support their benefits in any specific setting.3Post-radiation fistulaSuccess rates are lower for irradiated fistulae than for non-radiated fistulae.3Ureteric fistulaProphylactic ureteric stent insertion does not reduce risk of ureteric injury during gynaecological surgery.2Antegrade endoluminal distal ureteric occlusion combined with nephrostomy tube diversion often palliates urinary leakage due to malignant fistula in the terminal phase.4Urethro-vaginal fistulaUrethro-vaginal fistula repair may be complicated by SUI, urethral stricture, and urethral shortening, which may necessitate long-term follow-up.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingGeneralWhen reporting on outcomes after fistula repair, authors should make a clear distinction between fistula closure rates and postoperative urinary incontinence rates and the time at which the follow-up was organised.StrongDo not routinely use ureteric stents as prophylaxis against injury during routine gynaecological surgery.StrongSuspect ureteric injury or fistula in patients following pelvic surgery if a fluid leak or pelvicalyceal dilatation occurs postoperatively, or if drainage fluid contains high levels of creatinine.StrongUse three-dimensional imaging techniques to diagnose and localise urinary fistulae, particularly in cases with negative direct visual inspection or cystoscopy.WeakManage upper urinary tract fistulae initially by conservative or endoluminal techniques where such expertise and facilities exist.WeakSurgical principlesSurgeons involved in fistula surgery should have appropriate training, skills, and experience to select an appropriate procedure for each patient.WeakAttention should be given as appropriate to skin care, nutrition, rehabilitation, counselling, and support prior to, and following, fistula repair.WeakTailor the timing of fistula repair to the individual patient and surgeon requirements once any oedema, inflammation, tissue necrosis, or infection, are resolved.WeakEnsure that the bladder is continuously drained following fistula repair until healing is confirmed (expert opinion suggests: ten to fourteen days for simple and/or post-surgical fistulae; fourteen to 21 days for complex and/or post-radiation fistulae).WeakWhere urinary and/or faecal diversions are required, avoid using irradiated tissue for repair.WeakUse interposition graft when repair of radiation associated fistulae is undertaken.WeakRepair persistent urogenital fistulas by an abdominal approach using open, laparoscopic, or robotic techniques according to availability and competence.WeakUrethro-vaginal fistulae should preferably be repaired by a vaginal approach.Weak 