4.8.3. Diagnostic evaluation. Leakage of urine is the hallmark sign of a urogenital fistula. The leakage is usually painless, may be intermittent if it is position dependent, but more usually is constant. Unfortunately, intraoperative diagnosis of a genito-urinary or gastrointestinal injury is made in only about half of the cases [692]. Diagnosis of VVF usually requires clinical assessment often in combination with appropriate imaging or laboratory studies. As for any LUTS, history taking and focused physical examination with direct visual inspection are essential parts of urinary fistula diagnostic evaluation. Cystoscopy and retrograde bladder filling with a coloured fluid with placement of a tampon into the vagina to identify staining facilitate diagnosis of VVF. A double-dye test to differentiate between UVF and VVF may be useful in some cases [677]. Testing the creatinine level in either the extravasated or collected fluid will confirm fluid leakage as urine. Contrast-enhanced CT with late excretory phase reliably diagnoses urinary fistulae and provides information about ureteric integrity and the possible presence of associated urinoma. Magnetic resonance imaging, in particular with T2 weighting, also provides diagnostic information regarding fistulae [693]. Summary of evidenceLEAs for any LUTS, history taking and focused physical examination with direct visual inspection are essential parts of urinary fistula diagnostic evaluation.3Cystoscopy and retrograde bladder filling with a coloured fluid with placement of a tampon into the vagina to identify staining facilitate diagnosis of VVF.3Contrast-enhanced CT with late excretory phase reliably diagnoses urinary fistulae and provides information about ureteric integrity.3Magnetic resonance imaging, in particular with T2 weighting, also provides diagnostic information regarding fistulae.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingTake a complete medical history and perform a focused physical examination including direct visual inspection for evaluation of women with suspicion of urinary fistula.StrongUse cystoscopy and retrograde bladder filling with a coloured fluid to confirm the diagnosis of urinary fistula.WeakContrast-enhanced CT with late excretory phase and magnetic resonance imaging can be used in cases where the diagnosis of urinary fistula is challenging or to provide additional diagnostic information.Weak 