5.3.2.4. Thulium:yttrium-aluminium-garnet laser enucleation of the prostate. Mechanism of action: The Tm:YAG laser has been described in section 5.3.1.3. Enucleation using the Tm:YAG laser includes thulium vapoenucleation of the prostate (ThuVEP) and thulium Laser enucleation of the prostate (ThuLEP) (blunt enucleation). (Super) pulsed or continuous wave (CW) thulium:yttrium-aluminium garnet (wavelength 2,013 nm) or thulium fibre lasers (wavelength 1,940 nm) are be used for laser enucleation of the prostate and are well absorbed by water and water-containing tissues. Efficacy: Two meta-analyses evaluating ThuLEP vs. M-TURP and B-TURP reported no clinically relevant differences in short-term efficacy (Qmax, IPSS and QoL score) [340,391]. An RCT with five years follow-up comparing ThuLEP with B-TURP found no difference between the two procedures for Qmax, IPSS, PVR, and QoL [425]. A meta-analysis [426] evaluating ThuLEP vs. HoLEP showed no clinically relevant differences in IPSS, QoL score and Qmax at twelve months in accordance with one RCT showing similar results at eighteen months [427]. Furthermore, ThuLEP and PKEP were compared in one RCT with twelve months follow-up with no difference with regard to efficacy [428]. There are mainly prospective case studies on ThuVEP showing a significant improvement in IPSS, Qmax, and PVR after treatment [429-432]. In a retrospective comparative series, there were no differences between (super)pulsed and CW ThuLEP with regard to intra-operative, peri-operative data and clinical efficacy (Qmax, IPSS, QoL) [433]. Tolerability and safety: Two meta-analyses evaluating ThuLEP vs. M-TURP and B-TURP reported a longer operation time and shorter catheterisation time for ThuLEP compared to M-TURP and a shorter hospitalisation time for ThuLEP compared to B-TURP [340,391]. Lower blood transfusion rates compared to M-TURP, lower clot retention rates compared to B-TURP, and no difference in the other complication rates were also reported for ThuLEP [340,391]. One meta-analysis [426] evaluating ThuLEP vs. HoLEP showed a significant difference in enucleation time favouring ThuLEP, but no significant differences in operation, catheterisation and hospitalisation times, and short-term complication rates. One RCT showed no urethral and bladder neck strictures at eighteen months after ThuLEP and HoLEP, respectively [427]. ThuLEP and PKEP were compared in one RCT with twelve months follow-up [428]. No significant difference in complication rates was detected, but haemoglobin level decrease and catheterisation time was significantly lower for ThuLEP. An RCT comparing ThuLEP with B-TURP reported a significant difference in IIEF-5 score favouring ThuLEP at twelve months [434]. In comparative studies ThuVEP shows high intra-operative safety [435], also in case series of patients with large prostates [429] and anticoagulation or bleeding disorders [430,431]. A study focusing on post-operative complications after ThuVEP reported adverse events in 31% of cases, with 6.6% complications greater then Clavien grade 2 [436]. One case control study on ThuVEP with 48 month follow-up reported long-term durability of voiding improvements and overall re-operation rates of 2.4% [431]. Practical considerations: ThuLEP seems to offer similar efficacy and safety when compared to TURP, bipolar enucleation and HoLEP; whereas, ThuVEP is not supported by RCTs. Based on the limited number of RCTs there is a need for ongoing investigation of these techniques [437,438]. Summary of evidenceLEEnucleation of the prostate using the Tm:YAG laser demonstrates similar efficacy when compared to M-TURP/bipolar transurethral (plasmakinetic) enucleation, HoLEP and B-TURP in the short-, mid-, and long-term, respectively.1bEnucleation of the prostate using the Tm:YAG laser (ThuLEP) demonstrates similar safety compared to TURP/bipolar transurethral (plasmakinetic) enucleation, and HoLEP in the short- and mid-term, respectively.1bVapoenucleation of the prostate using a Tm:YAG laser (ThuVEP) seems to be safe in patients with large prostates and those receiving anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer enucleation of the prostate using the Tm:YAG laser (ThuLEP, ThuVEP) to men with moderate-to-severe LUTS as an alternative to transurethral resection of the prostate, holmium laser enucleation or bipolar transurethral (plasmakinetic) enucleation.WeakOffer Tm:YAG laser enucleation of the prostate to patients receiving anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy.Weak 