5.3.2.6. Enucleation techniques under investigation. 5.3.2.6.1. Minimal invasive simple prostatectomy Mechanism of action: The term minimal invasive simple prostatectomy (MISP) includes laparoscopic simple prostatectomy (LSP) [446] and robot-assisted simple prostatectomy (RASP) [447]. Both LSP and RASP are performed using different personalised techniques, based on the transcapsular (Millin) or transvesical (Freyer) approach. Efficacy: A SR and meta-analyses showed that in 27 observational studies including 764 patients mean increase in Qmax was 14.3 mL/s, and the mean improvement in IPSS was 17.2 [448]. There were no differences in improvements in Qmax and IPSS [448]. A meta-analysis comparing MISP vs. OP reported no significant differences with regard to functional and symptom parameters between the two techniques [449]. A multicentre RCT with median follow-up of 26 months did not demonstrate any significantly different functional or peri-operative results between LSP, RASP and HoLEP [450]. A SR and meta-analysis of five non-randomised comparative trials comparing RASP with LSP demonstrated a shorter length of hospital stay after RASP as well as a higher post-operative Qmax [451,452]. An RCT comparing HoLEP versus MISP for large volume (≥ 120 mL) prostate glands resulted in longer catheterisation time, in the LSP group than RASP and HoLEP groups (p=0.002). Furthermore, MISP resulted in longer hospitalisation, and lower rate of patients with new-onset of storage LUTS [452]. Tolerability and safety: A meta-analysis comparing MISP vs. OP demonstrated shorter hospital stay, as well as blood loss and transfusion rates for MISP [449,453]. In In comparative studies to OP, length of hospital stay, length of catheter use, and estimated blood loss were significantly lower in the MISP group, while the duration of surgery was longer. There were no differences in peri-operative complications between both procedures [448]. In a multicentre RCT comparing LSP, RASP and HoLEP LSP demonstrated significantly longer catheterisation times than RASP and HoLEP, whilst RASP and LSP showed longer hospitalisation times and lower rates of de novo bladder storage symptoms [450]. In a comparative analysis of robotic vs. OP for large-volume prostates, a propensity score-matched analysis was performed with five covariates. Robotic compared with OP demonstrated a significant shorter average length of hospital stay, but longer mean operative time. The robotic approach was associated with a lower estimated blood loss. Improvements in maximal flow rate, IPSS, QoL, PVR and post-operative PSA levels were similar for both groups. There was no difference in complications between the groups [454]. Practical considerations: Currently, most studies on MISP are of a retrospective nature. Adequately powered RCT against reference options are needed to compare efficacy, safety, and hospitalisation times, learning curve and costs of MISP and both OP and endoscopic methods. Summary of evidenceLEMinimal invasive simple prostatectomy is feasible in men with prostate sizes > 80 mL needing surgical treatment; however, RCTs are needed.2a 5.3.2.6.2. 532 nm (‘Greenlight’) laser enucleation of the prostate Two approaches for Potassium-Titanyl-Phosphate (KTP) and the lithium triborate (LBO) laser-based enucleation technique exist [455]. GreenLEP is an anatomical enucleation technique following the principle of blunt dissection of the adenoma with the sheath and laser energy for incision as described for ThuLEP [456]. A variation is the in-situ vaporisation of apically enucleated tissue, also referred to as anatomic vaporisation-incision technique [456,457]. To date, no high quality adequate RCTs evaluating enucleation using the KTP/LBO laser have been carried out [458,459]. 