7.2. Pre- and post-operative radiotherapy in muscle-invasive bladder cancer. 7.2.1. Post-operative radiotherapy Given the high rates of local-regional failure after RC in patients with locally-advanced (pT3–4) BC, estimated at ~30%, as well as the high risk of distant failure and poor survival for these patients, there is an interest in adjuvant therapies that address both the risk of local and distant disease. Data on adjuvant RT after RC are limited and further prospective studies are needed, but a more recent phase II trial compared adjuvant sequential chemotherapy and radiation vs. adjuvant chemotherapy alone in 120 patients with locally-advanced disease and negative margins after RC (with one or more risk factors: ≥ pT3b, grade 3, or node-positive), in a study population with 53% UC and 47% SCC. Addition of adjuvant RT to chemotherapy alone was associated with a statistically significant improvement in local relapse-free survival (at 2 years 96% vs. 69% favouring the addition of RT). Disease-free survival and OS also favoured the addition of RT, but those differences were not statistically significant and the study was not powered for those endpoints. Late-grade ≥ 3 GI toxicity in the chemoradiation arm was low (7% of patients) [309]. A 2019 systematic review evaluating the efficacy of adjuvant radiation for BC or UTUC found no clear benefit of adjuvant radiation following radical surgery (e.g., cystectomy), although the combination of adjuvant radiation with chemotherapy may be beneficial in locally-advanced disease [310]. Adjuvant radiation might be considered in patients with pT3/pT4 pN0–2 urothelial BC following RC, although this approach has been evaluated in only a limited number of studies without conclusive data demonstrating improvements in OS. Radiation fields should encompass areas at risk for harbouring residual microscopic disease based on pathologic findings at surgery and may include the cystectomy bed and pelvic LNs. Doses in the range of 45 to 50.4 Gy may be considered. A phase II trial with 72 patients showed that a dose of 50.4 of radiotherapy Gy can be used with acceptable toxicity and a high rate of local control [311]. A small retrospective study of 25 patients (median age 64 years) evaluated acute and late toxicity of moderate doses of pelvic RT (range, 45–50.4 Gy). After a median follow-up of 10.4 months the authors concluded that orthotopic ileal neobladders can tolerate moderate radiation doses without significant induced morbidity. Most of the acute GI toxicity seen was grade 1, four patients developed acute grade 2 toxicity; three of whom had been treated by NAC [312]. For patients not treated with NAC, it may be reasonable to sandwich adjuvant radiation between cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy. The safety and efficacy of concurrent radiosensitising chemotherapy in the adjuvant setting needs further study. 7.2.2. Pre-operative radiotherapy To date, six RCTs have been published investigating pre-operative RT, although all are from several decades ago. In the largest trial, pre-operative RT at a dose of 45 Gy was used, resulting in a significant increase in pathological complete response (9% to 34%) in favour of pre-operative RT, which was also a prognostic factor for survival [313]. The OS data were difficult to interpret since chemotherapy was used in a subset of patients only and more than 50% of patients (241/475) did not receive the planned treatment and were excluded from the final analyses. Two smaller studies using a dose of 20 Gy showed only a small survival advantage in ≥ T3 tumours [314,315]. Two other small trials confirmed downstaging after pre-operative RT [316,317]. In a retrospective analysis of 1,846 evaluable patients, only 34 patients received RT prior to orthotopic neobladder reconstruction. The authors conclude that following pelvic RT, a neobladder is possible in highly selected patients with statistically similar peri-operative complication rates compared to patients who did not receive prior RT. Patient selection, with oncologic factors (positive urethral margins, nodal involvement, and extravascular disease) more commonly than technical factors (adhesions/difficult dissection, bleeding, urethral stricture) influencing conversion from a planned neobladder reconstruction [318]. A meta-analysis of five RCTs showed a difference in 5-year survival (OR: 0.71, 95% CI: 0.48–1.06) in favour of pre-operative RT [319]. However, the meta-analysis was potentially biased by data from the largest trial in which patients were not given the planned treatment. When the largest trial was excluded from the analysis, the OR became 0.94 (95% CI: 0.57–1.55), which was not significant. A more recent RCT, comparing pre-operative vs. post-operative RT and RC (n = 100), showed comparable OS, DFS and complication rates [320]. Approximately half of these patients had UC, while the other half had SCC. In general, such older data is limited in being able to provide a robust evidence base for modern guideline recommendations. 7.2.3. Local therapy (surgery or radiotherapy) in oligometastatic disease The other disease state for which there may be an emerging role for adding local therapy Is oligometastatic bladder cancer. Oligometastatic status is defined as a situation with a limited number of metastatic sites. In a recent consensus, a maximum of three metastatic sites, all either resectable or amenable to stereotactic therapy, was proposed as the definition of oligometastatic bladder cancer [321]. Studies from other tumour types (prostate cancer, colorectal cancer and lung cancer) suggest possible survival benefit when adding local therapy. In bladder cancer, some retrospective studies suggest a potential survival benefit when incorporating local therapy to the bladder (including radiation therapy over chemotherapy alone) in metastatic disease [322,323], and when employing metastasis-directed therapy. [324-327] A favourable response to systemic treatment was proposed as the criterion for selection of patients for any metastasis-directed therapy [321]. However, the data in oligometastatic disease are limited and further prospective study in bladder cancer patients is needed. 7.2.4. Summary of evidence and guidelines for pre- and post-operative radiotherapy Summary of evidenceLENo contemporary data exists to support that pre-operative RT for operable MIBC increases survival.2aPre-operative RT for operable MIBC, using a dose of 45–50 Gy in fractions of 1.8–2 Gy, results in down-staging after 4 to 6 weeks.2Limited evidence supports the safe use of pre- and post-operative RT in case a neobladder is planned or in situ.3Limited high-quality evidence supports the use of pre-operative RT to decrease local recurrence of MIBC after RC.3Addition of adjuvant RT to chemotherapy is associated with an improvement in local relapse-free survival following cystectomy for locally-advanced bladder cancer (pT3b–4, or node-positive).2aThere are no randomised trials showing an effect for local therapy in oligometastastic bladder cancer.1Retrospective case series show some survival benefit for the additional of local therapy (to the primary and to sites of metastases) in oligometastatic bladder cancer.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not offer pre-operative radiotherapy (RT) for operable muscle-invasive bladder cancer since it will only result in down-staging, but will not improve survival.StrongDo not offer pre-operative RT when subsequent radical cystectomy (RC) with urinary diversion is planned.StrongConsider offering adjuvant RT in addition to chemotherapy following RC, based on pathologic risk (pT3b–4 or positive nodes or positive margins).WeakInform patients with oligometastatic disease about local therapy treatment options. Patients should be carefully selected for treatment and fully informed of the potential benefits and harms of the different treatment modalities as well as the fact that there is no definitive evidence supporting local therapy inoligometastatic disease.Weak 