7.4. Palliative and salvage cystectomy. Unresectable locally-advanced tumours (T4b, invading the pelvic or abdominal wall) may be accompanied by debilitating symptoms, including bleeding, pain, dysuria and urinary obstruction. These patients are candidates for palliative treatments, such as palliative RT. If control of the symptoms is not possible by less invasive methods, patients may be offered a palliative cystectomy with urinary diversion or urinary diversion only. Palliative cystectomy carries the greatest morbidity, particularly in patients with a poor PS. In a series of 74 patients who underwent palliative cystectomy, severe complications (Clavien-Dindo grade ≥ 3) occurred in 30%. The 30-day mortality rate was 9% and at eight months follow-up, 70% had died [413]. In a retrospective single-centre analysis, Pieretti et al., grouped 265 patients into salvage cystectomy post-TMT, primary cystectomy or primary cystectomy with prior history of non-TMT abdominal or pelvic RT. Post-TMT salvage cystectomy was associated with a higher incidence of any late (HR: 2.3, p = 0.02) and major late complications (HR: 2.1, p < 0.05) but there was no difference in DSS (p = 0.8) or OS (p = 0.9) between the groups [414]. 7.4.1. Guidelines for palliative and salvage cystectomy RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer radical cystectomy as a palliative treatment to patients with locally-advanced tumours (T4b).WeakOffer palliative cystectomy to patients with symptoms if control is not possible by less invasive methods.Weak 7.4.1.1. EAU-ESMO consensus statements on the management of advanced- and variant bladder cancer [81,82]* Consensus statementIn patients with clinical T4 or clinical N+ disease (regional), radical chemoradiation can be offered accepting that this may be palliative rather than curative in outcome.Chemoradiation should be given to improve local control in cases of inoperable locally-advanced tumours. *Only statements which met the a priori consensus threshold across all three stakeholder groups are listed (defined as ≥ 70% agreement and ≤ 15% disagreement, or vice versa). 7.4.2. Supportive care 7.4.2.1. Obstruction of the upper urinary tract Unilateral (best kidney) or bilateral nephrostomy tubes provide the easiest solution for UUT obstruction, but patients find the tubes inconvenient and prefer ureteral stenting. However, stenting can be difficult to achieve. Stents must be regularly replaced and there is the risk of stent obstruction or displacement. Another possible solution is a urinary diversion with, or without, a palliative cystectomy. 7.4.2.2. Bleeding and pain In the case of bleeding, the patient must be screened first for coagulation disorders or the patient’s use of anticoagulant drugs must be reviewed. Transurethral (laser) coagulation may be difficult in a bladder full of tumour or with a bleeding tumour. Intravesical rinsing of the bladder with 1% silver nitrate or 1–2% alum can be effective [415]. This can usually be done without any anaesthesia. The instillation of formalin (2.5–4% for 30 minutes) is a more aggressive and painful procedure, requiring anaesthesia. Formalin instillation has a higher risk of side-effects, e.g., bladder fibrosis, but is more likely to control the bleeding [415]. Vesicoureteral reflux should be excluded to prevent renal complications. Radiation therapy is another common strategy to control bleeding and is also used to control pain. An older study reported control of haematuria in 59% of patients and pain control in 73% [416]. Irritative bladder and bowel complaints due to irradiation are possible, but are usually mild. Non-conservative options are embolisation of specific arteries in the small pelvis, with success rates as high as 90% [415]. Radical surgery is a last resort and includes cystectomy and diversion (see above, Section 7.4.1). 