7.8. Quality of life. 7.8.1. Introduction The evaluation of HRQoL considers physical, psychological, emotional and social functioning. In patients with MIBC, HRQoL is affected, particularly in the physical and social functioning domains [550,551]. Several questionnaires have been validated for assessing HRQoL in patients with BC, including FACT-G [552], EORTC QLQ-C30/BLM30 [553], SF-36 [554] and the Bladder Cancer Index (BCI) [555]. In spite of these validated questionnaires, there is heterogeneity in the measurements used to assess sexual health. A health questionnaire that covers the entire range of sexual health in bladder cancer patients is currently lacking [556]. Regardless of the which questionnaire is used, assessment of the baseline and post-treatment HRQoL is important. Questionnaires are helpful tools in clinical decision making, but, in addition, data support the prognostic value of baseline HRQoL [557]. In a large population-based study of patients with MIBC and no prior psychiatric history, 31% of all patients with MIBC were diagnosed with a new mental health disorder after their bladder cancer diagnosis [558]. 7.8.2. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy Two RCTs including patiens undergoing NAC have published their HRQoL data [459,559]. Huddart et al., analysed the subset of patients within the BC2001 trial who underwent NAC prior to (chemo)radiation. Using the FACT-BL questionnaire, no detrimental impact of NAC on HRQoL was observed [459]. Kitamura et al., reported on 64 patients included in the JCOG0209 study who underwent NAC (MVAC vs. MVAC and RC). An overall decline on HRQoL was reported directly following NAC using the FACT-BL questionnaire. However, no difference in HRQoL was observed after the consolidating RC. 7.8.3. Radical cystectomy and urinary diversion Two systematic reviews and meta-analyses focused on HRQoL after RC and urinary diversion [366,560]. Yang et al., compared HRQoL of incontinent and continent urinary diversions (all types) including 29 studies (n = 3,754) of which 9 had a prospective design (one of which was randomised) [366]. Only three studies reported HRQoL data both pre- and post-operatively. All these three studies reported an initial deterioration in overall HRQoL but general health, functional and emotional domains at 12 months post-surgery were equal or better than baseline. Overall, no difference in HRQoL between continent and incontinent urinary diversion was reported although an ileal conduit may confer a small physical health benefit [560]. Cerruto et al., reported HRQoL comparing ileal conduit with orthotopic neobladder reconstruction [560]. A pooled analysis was performed including 18 studies (n = 1,553) of which the vast majority were retrospective studies. Although this study was hampered by methodological limitations, no statistical significant difference in overall HRQoL was found. Altogether, there appears to be no superior type of urinary diversion in terms of overall HRQoL but it is rather a result of proper patient selection. An older and isolated patient is probably better served with an ileal conduit, whereas a younger patient with a higher level of interest in body image and sexuality is better off with an orthotopic diversion. The patient’s choice is the key to the selection of reconstruction method [366]. A number of RCTs comparing ORC with RARC (with either intra- or extracorporeal urinary diversion) have reported their HRQoL data [358,561-563]. All studies reported no statistical significant difference in HRQoL outcomes between surgical techniques. 7.8.4. Adjuvant therapy HRQoL data was reported in the phase 3 Checkmate 274 RCT where patients were randomised for adjuvant nivolumab or placebo after radical surgery for bladder cancer or UTUC. Patients were not pre-treated with NAC. No clinically meaningful detoration in HRQoL was observed during nivolumab treatment (based on the EORTC QLQ-C30/VAS questionnaire) [483]. 7.8.5. Bladder-sparing trimodality therapy The only HRQoL data in bladder sparing treatment collected in a RCT setting was published by Huddart et al. [459]. The primary endpoint was the change in the Bladder Cancer Subscale (BLCS), as part of the FACT-BL questionnaire, at one year post-treatment. Questionnaire return rate at one and five years was 70% and 60%, respectively. A reduction in HRQoL was seen in the majority of the domains immediately following RT, however, in most patients the HRQoL scores returned to baseline 6 months after RT and maintained at this level for five years. Approximately 33% of patients reported persistent lower Bladder Cancer Subscale scores after five years. Addition of chemotherapy did not affect the HRQoL outcomes. Also see section 7.5.4 for further discussion of QoL after TMT. 7.8.6. Non-curative or metastatic bladder cancer In patients with primary non-curative or metastastic disease HRQoL is reduced because of associated micturition problems, bleeding, pain and therefore disturbance of social and sexual life [564]. Beneficial impact of palliative surgery [565], RT [566], and/or chemotherapy on bladder-related symptoms have been described [567]. A HRQoL analysis was performed in platinum-refractory patients who were randomised to pembrolizumab vs. another line of chemotherapy (KEYNOTE-45 trial) [568]. It was reported that patients treated with pembrolizumab had stable or improved global health status/QoL, whereas those treated with investigators’ choice of chemotherapy experienced declines in global health [568]. Recently, HRQoL data was presented from cohort 1 of the EV-201 study including 125 patients treated with enfortumab vedotin after failing previous treatment with platinum chemotherapy and anti–PD-1/L1 therapy [569]. Patients who remained on enfortumab vedotin treatment showed no detoriation in HRQoL. In patients with bone metastases at baseline, pain control and possibly pain reduction was observed. 7.8.7. Summary of evidence and recommendations for health-related quality of life Summary of evidenceLECompared to non-cancer controls, the diagnosis and treatment of BC has a negative impact on HRQoL.2aThere is no distinct difference in overall QoL between patients with continent or incontinent diversion.1bIn patients with MIBC treated with RC, overall HRQoL declines immediately after treatment and recovers to baseline at 12 months post-operatively in most patients.1bIn patients with MIBC treated with RT, overall HRQoL declines immediately after treatment, and recovers to baseline at 6 months post-treatment.1bHRQoL data are comparable for RARC (with either intracorporeal or extracorporeal urinary diversion) and ORC.1bIn patients with MIBC treated with RT, concomitant chemotherapy or neo-adjuvant chemotherapy has no significant impact on HRQoL.1bAdjuvant treatment with nivolumab does not result in a clinically meaningful decrease in HRQoL compared to placebo.1bIn patients with platinum-refractory advanced UC, pembrolizumab may be superior in terms of HRQoL compared to another line of chemotherapy.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingUse validated questionnaires to assess health-related quality of life in patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer, both at baseline and post-treatment.StrongDiscuss the type of urinary diversion taking into account a patient preference, existing comorbidities, tumour variables and coping abilities.Strong 