5.3.2. Neuromodulation. The role of neuromodulation in the management of pelvic pain should only be considered by specialists in pelvic pain management. These techniques are used as part of a broader management plan and require regular follow-up. The research base is developing and the techniques broadening (e.g., spinal cord stimulation, sacral root stimulation, dorsal root ganglion stimulation or peripheral nerve stimulation). These are expensive interventional techniques for patients refractory to other therapies. Neuromodulation is still finding its role in pelvic pain management. There has been growing evidence but more detailed, high quality research is required [459]. Its role in overactive bladder (OAB) and faecal incontinence is more robust but is limited for pain. Two SRs have evaluated neuromodulation techniques for CPPS [460,461]. Both studies concluded that neuromodulation may be effective in reducing pain and improving QoL in patients with CPPS; however, studies were of a low quality and long-term results were needed. Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is a non-invasive technique used in many pain conditions. A SR identified twelve studies of TENS in chronic pelvic pain conditions including four RCTs [460]. All RCTs demonstrated a significant reduction in pain following twelve weeks of treatment for pain conditions including dysmenorrhoea and CPPPS. Pain was also found to improve following TENS for provoked vestibular pain. There was conflicting data with regard to improvement of QoL following TENS; where validated questionnaires were used, no significant improvement was found, whereas in trialist-defined studies, an improvement was seen in TENS for dysmenorrhea and CPPPS. The beneficial effects of a course of TENS may be sustained; one study demonstrating a persistent benefit at 43 months in 73% of men with CPPPS and another demonstrating a prolonged significant improvement in women with provoked vestibular pain at ten months post-treatment. Where reported there were no adverse events recorded. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation could offer an effective non-invasive treatment option for patients with CPPPS. Percutaneous Tibial Nerve Stimulation Percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation (PTNS) is a minimally invasive technique that can be use in an outpatient setting. Two SRs have shown that PTNS is effective in reducing pain in patients with CPPPS [460,461]. Three RCTs identified showed a significant improvement in pain scores and QoL as measured by validated questionnaires. Where recorded, adverse events were rare and minor including temporary slight pain at application site and haematoma. Sacral Nerve Stimulation Sacral nerve stimulation (SNS) is an invasive technique requiring sedation or general anaesthesia for implantation of a device following trial stimulation. A SR review identified ten studies of SNS in CPPPS, either retrospective case series or prospective cohort studies and no RCTs. Where reported, a mean of 69% of participants progressed to implantation of device following test stimulation (range 52-91%). All studies reported an improvement in pain, statistically significant in five studies. Quality of Life was measured in three studies and a significant improvement demonstrated in two of three studies. There was a large variation in adverse events reported ranging from 0-50%. Complications not requiring surgical intervention included pain, failure of device, wound infection and seroma. Re-operation rate ranged between 11-50% for complications including lead migration, systemic infection, intrathecal implantation, loss of efficacy and erosion. In clinical practice, a patient should be appropriately counselled regarding the need for a period of trial stimulation and whilst there may be an improvement in symptoms, this should be weighed against a notable complication rate. A SR review in 2018 identified fourteen studies. In all, 403 patients had undergone percutaneous nerve evaluation and/or SNM stage 1 and 54.8%) had progressed to the permanent implantation stage, which is similar to that reported previously. The cause of pain was reported to be IC/BPS in 170 cases (42.2%). Visual Analogue Scale pain scores were available pre- and post-SNM in 210 patients and overall improvement in pain scores was significant. Sacral nerve stimulation is a promising treatment option for refractory chronic pelvic pain. This is mainly supported by level 2b studies. Randomised prospective studies are warranted to compare SNS vs. other modalities for chronic pelvic pain treatment. Further studies are needed to compare antegrade vs. retrograde approaches [462]. Other neuromodulation techniques A variety of other techniques of neuromodulation for patients with CPPPS were identified by SRs [460,463]. These techniques include intravaginal electrical stimulation for women with CPPPS, pudendal nerve stimulation for CPPPS, spinal cord stimulation for pudendal neuralgia, transcutaneous interferential electrical stimulation for IBS, electrical acupuncture for dysmenorrhoea and electrical stimulation/biofeedback and electromagnetic stimulation for men with CPPPS. Whilst an improvement in pain has been reported in these studies, it is noted that they are largely of low quality and further work is needed in this area to enable robust clinical recommendations to be made. Neuromodulation in combination with hormonal treatment in deep endometriosis may have some benefit [464]. 