5.3.1. Nerve blocks. Nerve blocks for pain management are usually carried out by specialists in pain medicine as part of a broader management plan [451]. They may have a diagnostic or therapeutic role. Textbooks have been written on the subject and practitioners using them should be trained in appropriate patient selection, indications, risks and benefits. Many such interventions also require understanding and expertise in using imaging techniques to perform the blocks accurately. Diagnostic blocks can be difficult to interpret due to the complex mechanisms underlying the painful condition or syndrome. Sustained but limited benefit may lead to more permanent procedures (e.g., radiofrequency procedures). There is a weak evidence base for these interventions for chronic non-malignant pain [452]. Pudendal Neuralgia The role of injections may be divided into two. First, an injection of local anaesthetic with or without steroids at the sight of nerve injury or nerve entrapment may produce a therapeutic action [453,454]. The second possible benefit is diagnostic. It has already been indicated that when the pudendal nerve is injured there are several sites where this may occur. Differential block of the pudendal nerve helps to provide information in relation to the site where the nerve may be trapped [250,455-457]. Infiltration at the ischial spine requires the use of a nerve stimulator/locator. Both motor (anal contraction) and sensory endpoints may be noted. The anatomical endpoint may be localised by fluoroscopy, CT guidance, or the use of US, the latter avoids any radiation, whereas CT guidance involves a significant amount of radiation. Fluoroscopy and ultrasound guidance imaging are the most frequently used techniques for performing nerve block because it is readily available to most anaesthetists. Pulsed radio frequency lesioning for pudendal neuralgia is being developed with a paper demonstrating potential benefit. Follow-up is short term and further research is required to better elucidate its place in management [458]. 