5.3.3. Surgery. Primary Bladder Pain Syndrome (PBPS)Bladder distension Although bladder hydrodistension is a common treatment for PBPS, the scientific justification is scarce. It can be part of the diagnostic evaluation, but has limited therapeutic role [465]. Hydrodistension and Botulinum toxin type A Botulinum toxin type A may have an anti-nociceptive effect on bladder afferent pathways, producing symptomatic and urodynamic improvements [466]. Treatment with hydrodistension and hydrodistension plus intravesical BTX-A has been compared [467]. There was symptomatic improvement in all patients. However, in the hydrodistension-only group, 70% returned to their previous symptoms after one month, while in the BTX-A-treated patients, VAS score and functional and cystometric bladder capacity improved at three months. Botulinum toxin type A trigonal-only injection seems effective and long-lasting as 87% of patients reported improvement after three months follow-up [468]. Over 50% reported continued benefit nine months after the first treatment. When re-treatment was needed, similar results were obtained. Up to 59% of patients remain responders after 9 treatments. The sustained duration of the effect, despite the increase in the number of procedures, suggests that intratrigonal sensory neurons do not develop tolerance to OnaBotA, even during long periods of administration [469]. Adverse effects of BTX-A administration for IC/PBPS were significantly less than for OAB syndrome, namely in increased postvoid residual volumes and decreased voiding efficiency [470]. Recent RCTs have reported benefits and long efficacy of BTX-A administration [471-474], but a summary estimate for overall change in pain following BTX-A injections was not possible in a recent SR [385]. Conflicting data on results hinders issuance of a clear guideline for the use of Botox in PBPS phenetypes [475]. Results of treatment with intravesical plasma rich (PRP) injections are also being explored. A recent prospective trial, showed that patients with GRA (global response assessment) > 2, had success rates at one month and at three months after the fourth PRP injection, of 70.6% and 76.7%, respectively. The VAS pain score, frequency, and nocturia showed a significant decrease (all p < 0.05). However, further studies are needed to validate findings [476]. Transurethral resection, coagulation and laser ablation Endourological destruction of bladder tissue aims to eliminate urothelial Hunner lesions. Coagulation of glomerulations or petequiae area is not recommended. Since the 1970s, resection and fulguration have been reported to achieve symptom relief, often for more than three years [477-479]. Repeated resection or fulguration treatments should be wisely indicated. A more recent study has shown no difference in therapeutic benefit between transurethral laser ablation or resection [479]. Major Surgery for PBPS 480 Primary bladder pain syndrome is a benign condition that can severely impact quality of life but does not shorten life expectancy. Consequently major operative procedures are ranked last in the therapeutic algorithm and are only appropriate as a last resort for patients with severe refractory disease. The level of evidence underpinning reconstructive surgery is weak with no consensus regarding the optimal surgical approach. A systematic review with 450 patients (90% female, median age 54.5 years) from 20 eligible studies reported symptomatic improvement in 77.2% of patients with an overall complication rate of 26.5% and a mortality of 1.3% [480]. This complication rate is likely to be an underestimate as a third of the procedures did not specify their complication data. All the studies included the systematic review were retrospective and observational with no control groups. There was also heterogeneity in the diagnostic criteria and outcome measures used. The main surgical options performed comprised: Urinary diversion without cystectomy is performed to minimise the duration and complexity of surgery and preserve sexual function and fertility, but complications related to the retained bladder commonly occur with the incidence of pyocystis reported to range between 3.3% and 67%.Subtotal (supratrigonal) cystectomy with substitution cystoplasty is the preferred reconstructive approach particularly in younger patients [481] and the use of various intestinal segments has been reported [482-484].Total (subtrigonal) cystectomy and orthotopic neobladder formation has the benefit of removing the trigone as a possible disease site, but requires ureteric re-implantation. Trigonal disease is reported in 50% of patients and surgical failure has been blamed on the trigone being left in place [485], especially in patients with non-lesion type disease [486,487]. Incomplete emptying of the orthotopic bladder augmentation is most likely to occur following trigonal resection so intermittent self-catheterisation may be required [488]. A study on female sexuality after cystectomy and orthotopic ileal neobladder showed pain relief in all patients and improvement in sexual function items in women who remained sexually active [489]. Pregnancies with subsequent lower-segment Caesarean section have been reported after ileocystoplasty [490].Cystectomy and ileal conduit formation avoids the increased surgical complexity of a continent urinary diversion and is the favoured approach in patients with significantly impaired renal function. The technique is considered for patients with PBPS who develop recurrent pain in the augmented bladder, continent pouch after enterocystoplasty or continent urinary diversion. Re-tubularisation of a previously used bowel segment to form a urinary conduit has been recommended [491]. Complete removal of the bladder is more likely to lead to symptom improvement compared with leaving part (subtotal cystectomy) or the whole bladder in situ [480]. In keeping with this, reports that un-resected PBPS bladders cease to induce symptoms after loss of contact with urine are limited [100,492]. Major surgery should be preceded by thorough pre-operative evaluation, with an emphasis on determining the relevant disease location and subtype. If major surgery is being considered the patient should be referred to a specialist centre experienced in managing CPPPS with a multi-disciplinary team approach. Primary Prostate Pain Syndrome There is no evidence for surgical management, including transurethral incision of the bladder neck, radical transurethral resection of the prostate or, in particular, radical prostatectomy in the management of chronic pain in patients with PPPS. A large Chinese RCT of circumcision combined with a triple oral therapy (ciprofloxacin, ibuprofen, tamsulosin) vs. oral therapy alone has been published for patients with PPPS (total n=774) [493]. It is hypothesised that there may be some immunological interaction via pathogenic antigen presenting cells in the foreskin with CD4+ T cells causing auto-immunity to the prostate gland. They reported an improvement in total NIH-CPSI score and subdomain scores at twelve weeks. However, despite a large cohort, the study results are questionable because of the weak theoretical background, and a potential large placebo effect lacking a sham control. In addition, no long-term effectiveness has been reported. Before having an impact on recommendations, the results of this study have to be independently confirmed and the treatment effect must persist. Primary Testicular Pain Syndrome Microsurgical denervation of the spermatic cord can be offered to patients with testicular pain. In a long-term follow-up study, patients who had a positive result on blocking the spermatic cord were found to have a good result following denervation [494,495]. Chronic Primary Anal and Abdominal Pain Syndrome Chronic primary anal pain syndrome after stapled procedures, such as hemorrhoidopexy or stapled transanal rectal resection may respond to excision of the scarred staple line as shown in 21 consecutive patients with an overall improvement of pain in 85.7% of patients undergoing scar excision surgery [496]. An early scar excision before three to six months after pain onset was associated with better pain relief. Adhesiolysis is still in discussion in the pain management after laparotomy/laparoscopy for different surgical indications in the pelvis and entire abdomen. An RCT has shown, that adhesiolysis is associated with an increased risk of operative complications, and additional operations and increased health care costs as compared to laparoscopy alone [497]. Primary Urethral Pain Syndrome There is no specific treatment that can be advised. Management should be multi-disciplinary and multi-modal [498]. Laser therapy of the trigonal region may be a specific treatment. One trial comparing two forms of laser reported good results, but did not compare with sham treatment [499]. The majority of publications on treatment of primary urethral pain syndrome have come from psychologists [500,501]. Presumed intra-abdominal adhesions In gynaeocological patients with CPPPS and presumed adhesions, there is no consensus as to whether adhesiolysis should be performed to improve pain [501]. Extensive surgery for endometriosis is challenging and is still considered to be controversial, as there is at least one RCT showing no benefit in pain relief after the removal of early extensive endometriosis vs. sham surgery [262,502]. Increasingly treatment algorithms are being developed using a multi-disciplinary approach, although none have thus far been proven clinically [503]. In patients with adenomyosis, the only curative surgery is hysterectomy but patients can benefit from hormonal therapy and analgesics (see Section 5.2.2). Pudendal neuralgia and surgery Decompression of an entrapped or injured nerve is a routine approach and probably should apply to the pudendal nerve as it applies to all other nerves. There are several approaches and the approach of choice probably depends upon the nature of the pathology. The most traditional approach is transgluteal; however, a transperineal approach may be an alternative, particularly if the nerve damage is thought to be related to previous pelvic surgery [250,504-508]. Currently, there has been only one prospective RCT (transgluteal approach) [507]. This study suggests that, if the patient has had the pain for less than six years, 66% of patients will see some improvement with surgery (vs. 40% if the pain has been present for more than six years). Surgery is not the answer for all patients. On talking to patients that have undergone surgery, providing the diagnosis was clear-cut, most patients were grateful to have undergone surgery but many still have symptoms that need management. Chronic Pelvic Pain and Prolapse/Incontinence Mesh Removing an existing mesh is a complex procedure [509]. Each patient is approached on an individual basis depending on the type of mesh and extent of complications [510]. The complexity of surgery often involves removal of dense scar tissue, reformation of inflamed vaginal skin and surgical reconstruction of the urethra and bladder [511]. Such surgery requires specialist skills, best provided within a multi-disciplinary tertiary setting. Possible complications as a result of this surgical removal include bleeding, infection, damage to surrounding organs as well as LUTS, persistent chronic pain and recurrent SUI, which occurs after mesh removal [512]. Removal of mesh, whilst complex, does have beneficial outcomes generally, which are also durable particularly for chronic pain [513]. However, the long-term consequences after the mesh is removed still can include, not only chronic persistent pain but also autoimmune responses and complex neuropathies affecting the pelvis and lower limbs [514,515]. Some of these can be treated effectively using a multi-disciplinary pain medicine approach [516]. In other cases, the residual symptoms may require the input of an immunologist, rheumatologist or other symptom-defined specialist. The alternative to continence and prolapse mesh surgery is dependent on the clinical findings at the time. They include behavioural change, physiotherapy (for SUI and Grade I-II uterovaginal prolapse) or traditional surgical techniques. Studies have shown that over 70% who committed to physiotherapy for SUI often did not need any further intervention [517]. Many clinicians are reverting to conservative measures first, before re-considering surgery. Clinicians are also now retraining in traditional continence surgical techniques, which existed in the pre-mesh era, such as the Burch colposuspension and autologous fascial sling; as well as traditional utero-vaginal prolapse techniques such as vaginal hysterectomy, sacrospinous fixation and fascial repair of vaginal wall prolapse. 