11.5. Non-Invasive Male Infertility Management. 11.5.1. Empirical treatments 11.5.1.1. Life-style Environmental and lifestyle factors may contribute to male infertility acting additively on a susceptible genetic background [81,1640]. Hence, lifestyle improvement can have a positive effect on sperm parameters. This includes: Weight loss: non-controlled studies have suggested that weight loss can result in improved sperm parameters [81,1813,1814]. However, data derived from RCTs are more conflicting. A meta-analysis of 28 cohort studies and 1,022 patients, documented that bariatric surgery did not improve sperm quality and function in morbidly obese men [1815]. Data on ART outcomes are lacking. Furthermore weight loss can improve obesity-related secondary hypogonadism, which may result in better outcomes in couples seeking medical care for infertility [1813,1815].Physical activity: a meta-analysis has documented that moderate-intensity (20–40 metabolic equivalents [METs]/week) or even high-intensity (40–80 METs-h/week) recreational physical activity can result in better semen parameters [1816]. Moreover, physical activity might improve hormonal profile [1813].Smoking: data derived from a large meta-analysis of 20 studies with 5,865 participants showed a negative association between smoking and sperm parameters [1817]. Alcohol consumption: Data derived from a recent meta-analysis including 15 cross-sectional studies and 16,395 men suggested that moderate alcohol does not adversely affect semen parameters, whereas high alcohol intake can have a detrimental effect on male fertility [1818] heavy chronic alcohol consumption (defined as > 2 drinks/day [1819]) can reduce testosterone levels [1819]. 11.5.1.2. Antioxidant treatment Oxidative stress is considered to be of the most important contributing factors in the pathogenesis of idiopathic infertility. Reactive oxygen species, the final products of OS, can impair sperm function acting at several levels, including plasma membrane lipid peroxidation, which can affect sperm motility, the acrosome reaction and chromatin maturation leading to increased SDF [1820]. Accordingly, seminal levels of ROS have been negatively associated with ART outcomes [1821]. Despite this, evidence for the role of antioxidant therapy in male infertility is still conflicting. A Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis including 34 RCTs and 2,876 couples using various antioxidant compounds, it was concluded that antioxidant therapy had a positive impact on live-birth and pregnancy rates in sub-fertile couples undergoing ART cycles [1822]. Similar results were also reported in a meta-analysis including 61 studies with 6,264 infertile men, aged 18-65 years [1823]. However, the quality of the reported studies is poor. The Males, Antioxidants, and Infertility (MOXI) trial found that antioxidants did not improve semen parameters or DNA integrity compared to placebo among infertile men with male factor infertility. Moreover, cumulative live-birth rate did not differ at 6 months between the antioxidant and placebo groups (15% vs. 24%) [1824]. No clear conclusions were possible regarding the specific antioxidants to use or and/or therapeutic regimes for improving sperm parameters and pregnancy rate [1823]. 11.5.1.3. Selective oestrogen receptor modulators Selective oestrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block oestrogen receptors at the level of the hypothalamus, which results in stimulation of GnRH secretion, leading to an increase in pituitary gonadotropin release and stimulation of spermatogenesis [1825]. Meta-analysed data derived from eleven RCTs showed that SERMs significantly increased pregnancy rate, sperm and hormonal parameters [1826]. Similar results were confirmed in the latest updated meta-analysis of sixteen studies [1825]. However, previous SR failed to find any association between SERMs and pregnancy rate [1827]. It should be recognised that the quality of the papers considered was low and only a few studies were placebo-controlled. In conclusion, although some positive results relating to the use of SERMs in men with idiopathic infertility have been reported, no conclusive recommendations can be drawn due to poor quality of the available evidence. Furthermore, complications from the use of SERMs were under-reported. 11.5.1.4. Aromatase inhibitors Aromatase, a cytochrome p450 enzyme, is present in the testes, prostate, brain, bone, and adipose tissue of men; it converts testosterone and androstenedione to oestradiol and oestrone, respectively. Oestradiol negatively feeds back on the hypothalamus and pituitary to reduce gonadotropic secretions, ultimately affecting spermatogenesis. In this context, aromatase inhibitors (AIs) may decrease oestrogen production by reversibly inhibiting cytochrome p450 isoenzymes 2A6 and 2C19 of the aromatase enzyme complex inhibiting the negative feedback of oestrogen on the hypothalamus resulting in stronger GnRH pulses that stimulate the pituitary to increase production of FSH [1828-1831]. Aromatase activity has been associated with male infertility characterised by testicular dysfunction with low serum testosterone and/or testosterone to oestradiol ratio. In this context, AIs have been reported to increase endogenous testosterone production and improve spermatogenesis in the setting of infertility as an off-label option for treatment [1832]. Either steroidal (testolactone) and non-steroidal (anastrozole and letrozole) AIs significantly improve hormonal and semen parameters in infertile men, with a safe tolerability profile, although prospective RCTs are necessary to better define the efficacy of these medications in this clinical setting [1830,1832]. 11.5.2. Summary of evidence and recommendation for Non-Invasive Male Infertility Management Summary of evidenceLEIn infertile men life style factors including obesity, low physical activity, smoking and high alcohol intake are associated with decreased sperm quality.2aIn men with idiopathic oligo-astheno-teratozoospermia, life-style changes including weight loss and increased physical activity, smoking cessation and alcohol intake reduction may improve sperm quality and the chances of conception.2aNo conclusive data are available regarding the beneficial treatment with antioxidants in men with idiopathic infertility, although they may improve semen parameters.1bNo conclusive data are available regarding the use of selective oestrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) in men with idiopathic infertility.1bNo conclusive data are available regarding the use of steroidal (testolactone) or nonsteroidal (anastrozole and letrozole) aromatase inhibitors in men with idiopathic infertility.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingInform infertile men about the detrimental effects of obesity, low physical activity, smoking and high alcohol intake on sperm quality and testosterone levels. Therefore, advise infertile men to improve life style factors to improve their chances of conception.StrongDo not routinely treat patients with idiopathic infertility with antioxidants, selective oestrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) or aromatase inhibitors (Ais).Weak 11.5.3. Hormonal therapy 11.5.3.1. Secondary hypogonadism (A brief discussion on Pre-Pubertal-Onset can be found in Appendix 12, online supplementary evidence). Post-Pubertal Onset: Human Chorionic Gonadotrophin (hCG) alone is usually required first to stimulate spermatogenesis. A starting dose of 250 IU hCG twice weekly is suggested, and if normal testosterone levels are reached, hCG doses may be increased up to 2,000 IU twice weekly. Again, semen analysis should be performed every three months to assess response, unless conception has taken place. If there is a failure of stimulation of spermatogenesis, then FSH can be added (75 IU three times per week, increasing to 150 IU three times per week if indicated). Similarly, combination therapy with FSH and hCG can be administered from the beginning of treatment, promoting better outcomes in men with HH [121]. No difference in outcomes were observed when urinary-derived, highly purified FSH was compared to recombinant FSH [121]. Greater baseline testicular volume is a good prognostic indicator for response to gonadotrophin treatment while previous testosterone therapy can have a negative impact on gonadotropin treatment outcomes in men with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism [1833]. However, this observation has been subsequently refuted by a meta-analysis that did not confirm a real negative role of testosterone therapy in terms of future fertility in this specific setting [121]. 11.5.3.1.1. Secondary hypogonadism due to hyperprolactinemia In the presence of hyperprolactinaemia, causing suppression of gonadotrophins resulting in sub-fertility the treatment independent of aetiology (including a pituitary adenoma) is dopamine agonist therapy or withdrawal of the drug that causes the condition. Dopamine agonists used include bromocriptine, cabergoline and quinagolide. 11.5.3.2. Primary Hypogonadism There is no substantial evidence that gonadotrophin therapy has any beneficial effect in the presence of classical testicular failure. Likewise, there are no data to support the use of other hormonal treatments (including SERMs or AIs) in the case of primary hypogonadism to improve spermatogenesis [82,1834]. 11.5.3.3. Idiopathic Male Factor Infertility There is some evidence that FSH treatment increases sperm parameters in idiopathic oligozoospermic men with FSH levels within the normal range (generally 1.5 – 8 mIU/mL)[1835]. It has also been reported that FSH may improve SDF rates as well as ameliorating AMH and inhibin levels [1836-1839]. High-dose FSH therapy is more effective in achieving a testicular response than lower doses are [1840]. A Cochrane review including six RCTs with 456 participants, different treatment protocols and follow-up periods concluded that FSH treatment resulted in higher live-birth and pregnancy rates compared with placebo or no treatment. However, no significant difference among groups was observed when ICSI or IUI were considered [1841]. In a meta-analysis including 15 trials with > 1,200 patients, similar findings after FSH treatment were observed in terms of both spontaneous pregnancies and pregnancies after ART [1842]. A further study showed that in azoospermic men undergoing TESE-ICSI there were improved SRRs and higher pregnancy and fertilisation rates in men treated with FSH compared to untreated men [1843]. In men with NOA, combination hCG/FSH therapy was shown to increase SRR in only one study [1844]. Human chorionic gonadotrophin alone prior to TESE in NOA has not been found to have any benefit on SRRs [1845]. Overall the evidence for the use of hormone therapy prior to SSR is limited and treatment should be confined to clinical trials and not used routinely in clinical practice. 11.5.3.4. Anabolic Steroid Abuse Oligospermia or azoospermia as a result of anabolic abuse should be treated initially by withdrawal of the anabolic steroid. There is no common indication for treating this disorder; the management is based on case reports and clinical experience. Usually, adequate sperm numbers and quality will improve over a six to twelve-month period from cessation. If after this interval the condition persists, then hCG without or in combination with FSH as an alternative to clomiphene can be used to stimulate spermatogenesis [1846]. 11.5.3.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for treatment of male infertility with hormonal therapy Summary of evidenceLEFollicle stimulating hormone (FSH) promotes spermatogenesis and testicular growth during puberty. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) acts like luteinizing hormone (LH) and is used to stimulate intratesticular testosterone production and spermatogenesis in men with hypopituitarism after puberty.2bPrepubertal secondary hypogonadism requires the association of FSH and hCG or pulsatile GnRH, even if its use is limited by the difficult administration.1bSecondary hypogonadism in adults can be effectively treated with subcutaneous hCG and FSH.2bThe use of GnRH therapy is more expensive and does not offer any advantages compared to gonadotropins for the treatment of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.3In postpubertal forms of secondary hypogonadism, sequential use of hCG and FSH or their combination from the beginning are options.1bTesticular volume is one of the main predictors of response to gonadotropin therapy in men with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.2aDopamine agonists are used to treat hyperprolactinaemia.2aFSH therapy (any formulation) has been associated with improvement in sperm quality and increased spontaneous and assisted pregnancy rates in idiopathic infertile males.2aNo conclusive recommendations can be given on the use of high-dose FSH in men with idiopathic infertility and prior (m)TESE and therefore cannot be routinely advocated.2aTestosterone therapy is contraindicated in infertile men.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingInduce spermatogenesis in men with congenital or acquired hypogonadotropic hypogonadism who wish to conceive by effective drug therapy (hCG; human menopausal gonadotropins; recombinant FSH; highly purified FSH).StrongUse FSH treatment in men with idiopathic oligozoospermia and FSH values within the normal range, to ameliorate spermatogenesis outcomes.WeakDo not treat idiopathic infertility with high dose FSH.WeakDo not start hormonal stimulation prior TESE in men with non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) outside clinical trials.WeakDo not use testosterone therapy for the treatment of male infertility.StrongProvide testosterone therapy for symptomatic patients with primary and secondary hypogonadism who are not considering parenthood.StrongOffer dopamine agonist therapy in men with hyperprolactinemia to improve sperm quality.WeakWithdraw anabolic steroids in infertile men for six to twelve months month before considering treatment with selective oestrogen receptor modulators (SERMS) or gonadotrophin therapy to induce spermatogenesis.Weak 