5.2. Imaging. 5.2.1. Primary tumour The primary tumour and contralateral testis need to be assessed radiologically to confirm the presence of a mass;determine whether it is intra- or extra-testicular;assess its volume and anatomical location;characterise the contralateral testicle – to exclude other lesions and identify risk factors for GCNIS (see section 5.4.4). High-frequency (>10 MHz) testicular US is recommended. Scrotal US is also recommended for all men with retroperitoneal or visceral masses with/or without elevated serum β-hCG or Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in the absence of a palpable testicular mass [49]. Small, usually non-palpable masses may be incidental findings on scrotal US which may be benign. Of lesions with small diameter virtually all < 3mm, 87% of those < 5mm and 70% < 10mm are benign [50-52]. With small masses US features may assist in discriminating between benign and malignant tumours although none are completely reliable [50]. Scrotal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides higher sensitivity and specificity than US in the diagnosis of TC, but its high cost does not justify its routine use for this purpose [53]. It should only be considered when US is inconclusive as local staging for potential testis-sparing surgery (TSS), to differentiate between paratesticular and intratesticular lesions, and/or to characterise intratesticular masses (e.g., distinctive features of Leydig tumours) [53]. 5.2.2. Staging Cross-sectional imaging of the chest, abdomen and pelvis is recommended in patients with elevated markers or clinical suspicion of metastases for staging before orchidectomy and remains standard practice. This may be postponed in patients with small or indeterminant masses until histopathological confirmation of malignancy. Contrast enhanced CT scan (CECT) and MRI are the imaging modalities used. Evidence does not support the use of Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) for initial staging of TC [54,55]. a. Abdomen and Pelvis Contrast enhanced CT scan is the long-established imaging modality used to assess the abdomen and pelvis to identify nodal and visceral metastases. The size of metastases should be described in three dimensions, or at least by the greatest diameter. The expected patterns of nodal spread in TC should be considered when evaluating small and borderline nodes. A SR of a number of small studies, with a total of 102 evaluable patients, has suggested that MRI appears comparable to CECT in detecting nodal metastases [56]. It is significantly more expensive and less available than CECT for routine use. It clearly has utility in patients who have contra-indications to iodine-based contrast media or likely to require numerous subsequent scans. b. Thorax The chest and supraclavicular fossa should also be imaged with CECT to assess for nodal and pulmonary disease. Magnetic resonance imaging appears equivalent to CT in detecting supra-diaphragmatic lymph nodes but less sensitive in detecting pulmonary nodules. Thus, it is not recommended as a routine alternative to CT [57]. c. Other Sites Cerebral and spinal imaging is recommended in GCT patients with either multiple lung metastases or poor-prognosis IGCCCG risk group (especially with β-hCG values > 5,000 UI/L), or clinical symptoms [58]. Data from cerebral and spinal metastasis detection in other malignancies suggest that MRI is far more sensitive than CECT but requires specific expertise [59,60]. When available, MRI should be used to evaluate for both cerebral and spinal metastases in GCTs if there are clinical concerns. Contrast enhanced computerised tomography may be used if MRI is not available or contraindicated. 