5.5. Pathological examination of the testis. The recommendations for reporting and handling the pathological examination of a testis neoplasm are based on the recommendations of the International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) [39,44,87,88]. Mandatory pathological requirements: Macroscopic features: It must indicate radical or partial orchidectomy, side, testis size, number of tumours, and macroscopic features of the epididymis, cord length, and tunica vaginalis.Sampling: At least a 1 cm2 section for every centimetre of maximum tumour diameter including normal macroscopic parenchyma (if present), tunica albuginea and epididymis, with selection of suspicious areas. If the tumour is < 20 mm it should be completely sampled.At least one proximal (base of the cord) and one distal section of spermatic cord plus any suspicious area. Cord blocks should preferably be taken prior to tumour sections to avoid contamination.Microscopic features and diagnosis: Histological types (specify individual components and estimate amount as percentage) according to WHO 2022 [27]:Presence or absence of peri-tumoral lymph and/or blood vessel invasion. In case of doubt, the use of endothelial markers, such as CD31, are recommended.Presence or absence of GCNIS in non-tumour parenchyma.In case of rete testis invasion attention should be paid to distinguishing between pagetoid involvement and stromal invasion [44].If microscopic findings are not concordant with serum markers further block samples should be taken.Pathological tumour (pT) category according to TNM 2016 [28]. In a multifocal seminoma the largest nodule should be used to determinate pT category. Immune-histochemical markers in cases of doubt are: Seminoma: CD-117 (c-KIT), OCT 3/4, Sall4, PLAPGCNIS: CD-117 (c-KIT), OCT 3 / 4, Sall4, PLAPSyncytiotrophoblastic: β-hCGEmbryonal carcinoma: CD30Yolk sac tumour: Glypican 3, AFP.Sex cord gonadal tumours: Inhibin, calretinin steroidogenic factor 1. The search for i12p (FISH or PCR) or gain in Chr9 (spermatocytic tumour) are additional molecular techniques which are only rarely required. Confirmation of the utility of other molecular markers such as P53, MDM2, KRAS and HRAS is awaited [89]. In order to facilitate consistent and accurate data collection, promote research, and improve patient care, the International Collaboration on Cancer Reporting has constructed a dataset for the reporting of urological neoplasms. The dataset for testicular tumours encompasses the updated 2016 WHO classification of urological tumours, the ISUP consultation and staging with the 8th edition of the American Joint Cancer Committee (AJCC) [88]. The dataset includes those elements unanimously agreed by the expert panel as “required” (mandatory) and those “recommended” (non-mandatory) that would ideally be included but are either non-validated or not regularly used in patient management [88]. The dataset for handling pathological assessment of TC is shown in Table 5. Table 5: Recommended dataset for reporting of neoplasia of the testis (modified from the International Collaboration on Cancer Reporting) [88] ElementsRequiredRecommended*ContentRemarksClinical information√- Not provided- Previous history of testicular cancer- Previous therapy- OtherSpecify eachSerum tumour markers√- Not provided- If provided within normal limitsor- Specify serum tumour markers used- Specify levels- Specify date markers were drawnSelect all that apply:Serum tumour markers: LDH (IU/L), AFP (ug/L), β-hCG (IU/L)Operative procedure√- Not specified- Orchidectomy partial- Orchidectomy radical- OtherSpecify side for partial or radical orchidectomy.Specify otherTumour focality√- Cannot be assessed- Indeterminate- Unifocal- MultifocalIf multifocal specify number of tumours in specimen.Maximum tumour dimension√- Cannot be assessed- Dimensions largest tumour (mm)- Dimensions additional tumour nodules#Specify at least maximum diameterof largest tumour.Preferably specified3 dimensions/axes.#Macroscopic extent of invasion√- Cannot be assessed- Confined to testis- Invades epididymis- Invades tunica vaginalis- Invades hilar structures- Invades spermatic cord- Invades scrotum- OtherSelect all that apply.If other specify.Block identification key√N/AList overleaf or separately with indication of nature and origin of all tissue blocks.Histological tumour type√- Germ cell tumour: type and percentage- OtherUse WHOclassification (2022) update [27].If other specify.Microscopic extent of invasion√- Rete testis of stromal/interstitial type- Epididymis- Hilar fat- Tunica albuginea#- Tunica vaginalis- Spermatic cord- Scrotal wallFor all:- not submitted- not involved- involvedLymphovascular extension√- Not identified- PresentIf present specify type.#Intratubular lesions (GCNIS)√- Not identified- Present- Other intratubular lesions#If other intratubular lesions present identify type.#Margin status√- Partial orchidectomy:. cannot be assessed. involved. not involved- Radical orchidectomy:. cannot be assessed. spermatic cord margin involved. spermatic cord margin not involved- Other margin involvedIn partial orchidectomy if margin not involved, distance of tumour from closest margin (mm).#If other margin involved specify.Coexisting pathology√- None identified- Hemosiderin-laden macrophages- Atrophy- OtherIf other specifyAncillary studies√- Not performed- PerformedIf performed specifyResponse to neoadjuvant therapy√- Present- Absent- No prior treatment- Cannot be assessedExplain reasons if cannot be assessed.Pathologic staging*√T classification according to TNM 8th edition (UICC)**m-multiple primary tumoursr-recurrenty-post-therapy * Not mandatory. Ideally to be included but either non-validated or no regularly used in patient management.** TNM 8th edition (AJCC) used in the original publication.# Recommended, i.p. intratubular seminoma and embryonal carcinoma. 