3.8.3. Diagnostic evaluation. 3.8.3.1. Clinical diagnosis Signs and systemic symptoms compatible with CA-UTI include new onset or worsening of fever, rigors, altered mental status, malaise, or lethargy with no other identified cause, flank pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, acute haematuria, pelvic discomfort and in those whose catheters have been removed dysuria, urgent or frequent urination and suprapubic pain or tenderness [234]. In the catheterised patient, the presence or absence of odorous or cloudy urine alone should not be used to differentiate CA-ABU from CA-UTI [234,235]. 3.8.3.2. Laboratory diagnosis Microbiologically, CA-UTI is defined by microbial growth of ≥ 103 cfu/mL of one or more bacterial species in a single catheter urine specimen or in a mid-stream voided urine specimen from a patient whose urethral, suprapubic, or condom catheter has been removed within the previous 48 hours [235]. In catheterised patients, pyuria is not diagnostic for CA-UTI. The presence, absence, or degree of pyuria should not be used to differentiate CA-ABU from CA-UTI. Pyuria accompanying CA-ABU should not be interpreted as an indication for antimicrobial treatment. The absence of pyuria in a symptomatic patient suggests a diagnosis other than CA-UTI [235]. 3.8.3.3. Summary of evidence table and recommendations for diagnostic evaluation of CA-UTI Summary of evidenceLEPatients with indwelling or suprapubic catheters become carriers of ABU, with antibiotic treatment showing no benefit.1aIn the catheterised patient, the presence or absence of odorous or cloudy urine alone should not be used to differentiate CA-ABU from CA-UTI.2Microbiologically CA-UTI is defined by microbial growth of ≥ 103 cfu/mL of one or more bacterial species in a single catheter urine specimen or in a mid-stream voided urine specimen from a patient whose catheter has been removed within the previous 48 hours.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not carry out routine urine culture in asymptomatic catheterised patients.StrongDo not use pyuria as sole indicator for catheter-associated UTI.StrongDo not use the presence or absence of odorous or cloudy urine alone to differentiate catheter-associated asymptomatic bacteriuria from catheter-associated UTI.Strong 