3.8.4. Disease management. 3.8.4.1. Limiting catheterisation and appropriate catheter discontinuation Indwelling catheters should be placed only when they are clinically indicated; for example, for management of urinary retention or where strict monitoring of fluid balance is required. Catheter restriction protocols are an important part of multi-modal interventions to reduce CA-UTI rates. Nurse-driven protocols in hospitals as well as community based multi-modal targeted infection programs have been proven to reduce CA-UTI rates [256,257]. Adjunctive devices such as electronic reminder systems have also been shown to assist in prompt catheter removal in hospital settings (including non-ICU). A systematic review of nineteen different interventions to reduce UTI (including catheter discontinuation and limiting catheterisation), in nursing home patients reported successful CA-UTI reduction and reduced catheter usage [258]. Another report of over 2,800 patients on a surgical oncology unit found that increasing catheter bundle compliance resulted in a significant reduction in CA-UTI rates [259]. 3.8.4.2. Urethral cleaning and chlorhexidine bathing A network meta-analysis of 33 studies (6,490 patients) found no difference in the incidence of CA-UTI comparing the different urethral cleaning methods vs. disinfection [260]. The efficacy of chlorhexidine baths (either using 2% chlorhexidine-impregnated cloths or 4% chlorhexidine-based soap) in reducing CA-UTI is debatable. In a RCT of 10,783 ICU patients, no difference in CA-UTI rates were reported between chlorhexidine and control bathing groups [261]. However, a systematic review of fifteen studies involving only ICU patients reported that daily chlorhexidine bathing was associated with a significant reduction in CA-UTI (RR 0.68) [262]. 3.8.4.3. Alternatives to indwelling urethral catheterisation Alternatives include intermittent urethral catheterisation (IC) or suprapubic catheterisation. In a systematic review of patients undergoing gynaecological surgery, indwelling catheters were associated with higher rates of symptomatic UTIs compared to IC [263]. A further meta-analysis of post-partum women reported no difference in the incidence of UTI after labour between continuous catheterisation and IC [263]. A prospective cohort study of nursing home residents found that residents with a suprapubic catheter had fewer CA-UTIs and where hospitalised less, but were more likely to be colonised with multi drug resistant organisms [264]. A Cochrane Review found insufficient evidence to assess the value of different policies for replacing long-term urinary catheters on patient outcomes [98]. Another Cochrane review investigating the role of urethral (indwelling or intermittent) vs. suprapubic catheterisation in the short-term found inconclusive evidence of an effect on UTI rates [265]. For patients with NLUTD, a further systematic review found no randomised or quasi-randomised controlled trials and therefore no conclusions regarding the use of the different types of catheters could be made [266]. Therefore, based on the available literature, while there are some limited studies showing a benefit of IC or suprapubic catheterisation over urethral catheterisation for CA-UTI rates, there is insufficient evidence to recommend those approaches routinely [267]. 3.8.4.4. Impregnated or coated catheters Hydrophilic coated catheters have been found to be beneficial for reducing CA-UTI rates. A meta-analysis of seven studies investigating RCTs comparing hydrophilic coated to PVC (standard) catheters for IC found a statistically lower risk ratio (0.84) for the frequency of UTI in the hydrophilic catheter group [268]. A systematic review and practice policy statements on UTI prevention in patients with spina bifida recommended the use of single-use and hydrophilic catheters for IC [269]. Silver-alloy-impregnated catheters have not been associated with reduced CA-UTI rates. A small RCT of 54 ICU patients showed no significant difference in UTI rates between the silver-alloy impregnated group and the standard silicone foley catheter group [270]. In a cohort study of patients undergoing suprapubic catheter placement at the time of pelvic organ prolapsed surgery, a 5% difference in UTI rate at six weeks was noted, although this was not significant [271]. A systematic review of 26 trials (12,422 patients) reported that silver alloy-coated catheters were not associated with a statistically significant reduction in CA-UTI and were considerably more expensive [272]. However, the same study found that nitrofurazone-impregnated catheters reduce the risk of symptomatic CA-UTI; however, this was borderline significant (RR 0.84, 95% CI 0.71 to 0.99) [272]. A more recent RCT (214 patients) evaluating the use of nitrofurazone-infused catheters post-renal transplant found no benefit for their use [273]. Additionally, another RCT showed no benefit for the use of silver-alloy-coated indwelling catheters for reduction of UTI in 489 patients with spinal cord injury [274]. From a microbiological perspective, there may be a difference in organisms causing CA-UTI from urethral and suprapubic catheters and therefore urine culture results are important to guide therapy [267]. 3.8.4.5. Antibiotic prophylaxis for catheter removal or insertion The issue of whether antibiotic prophylaxis reduce the rate of symptomatic UTI in adults following indwelling bladder catheter removal has been the subject of multiple RCTs. A review and meta-analysis identified seven RCTs with 1,520 participants. Meta-analysis showed overall benefit for use of prophylaxis RR (95%CI) = 0.45 (0.28-0.72); ARR 5.8% (from 10.5% to 4.7%) with a number needed to treat (NNT) of 17 [214]. Results for individual trials were inconsistent with five trials including the possibility of no benefit [214]. In an affectional RCT with 172 participants undergoing laparoscopic radical prostatectomy randomised to seven days of ciprofloxacin (n=80) or no treatment (n=80) at the time of catheter removal, which occurred at a mean of nine days post-operatively, there was no difference in infective complications recorded at up to four weeks after catheter removal. More isolates obtained from the prophylaxis group (11) were resistant to ciprofloxacin compared to the no treatment group (3) [215]. With regards to catheter insertion, a systematic review and meta-analysis showed that prophylactic antibiotics reduced the rate of bacteriuria and other signs of infection, such as pyuria, fever and gram‐negative isolates in patients’ urine, in surgical patients who undergo bladder drainage for at least 24 hours post-operatively [275]. 3.8.4.6. Antibiotic prophylaxis for intermittent self-catheterisation (ISC) An RCT investigating the effect of antibiotic prophylaxis in patients performing ISC showed that the frequency of symptomatic antibiotic-treated UTI was reduced by 48% using prophylaxis in a cohort of 404 patients performing ISC [276]. However, resistance against the antibiotics used for UTI treatment was more frequent in urinary isolates from the prophylaxis group than in those from the control group at 9–12 months. While the literature shows some benefit for reduction of CA-UTI by utilising antibiotics, the routine use of antibiotics for such a common procedure in the healthcare setting would result in an increased usage of antimicrobials. As highlighted in some of the RCTs this strategy is associated with increased antimicrobial resistance. Antibiotic use is the main driving force in the development of antimicrobial resistance. Current antimicrobial stewardship principles would not favour the routine use of antibiotic prophylaxis for either catheter changes or ISC even when UTIs could be prevented [267]. 3.8.4.7. Antimicrobial treatment for suspected CA-UTI A urine specimen for culture should be obtained prior to initiating antimicrobial therapy for presumed CA-UTI due to the wide spectrum of potential infecting organisms and the increased likelihood of antimicrobial resistance. The urine culture should be obtained from the freshly placed catheter prior to the initiation of antimicrobial therapy [235]. Based on the global prevalence on infections in urology (GPIU) study, the causative micro-organisms in CA-UTI are comparable with the causative micro-organisms in other cUTIs; therefore, symptomatic CA-UTIs should be treated according to the recommendations for cUTI (see section 3.7.5) [277]. Seven days is the recommended duration of antimicrobial treatment for patients with CA-UTI who have prompt resolution of symptoms, and fourteen days of treatment is recommended for those with a delayed response, regardless of whether the patient remains catheterised or not [235]. A five-day regimen of levofloxacin may be considered in patients with CA-UTI who are not severely ill. Data are insufficient to make such a recommendation about other fluoroquinolones. With the rise in fluoroquinolone resistance, alternative antimicrobial agents should be selected where possible to start empirical therapy based on local microbiological information. A 5-day antibiotic regimen with catheter exchange has been shown in one study to be non-inferior to a 10-day regimen with catheter retention on the basis of clinical cure [278]. A three-day antimicrobial regimen may be considered for women aged ≤ 65 years who develop CA-UTI without upper urinary tract symptoms after an indwelling catheter has been removed. If an indwelling catheter has been in place for two weeks at the onset of CA-UTI and is still indicated, the catheter should be replaced to hasten resolution of symptoms and to reduce the risk of subsequent CA-bacteriuria and CA-UTI. If use of the catheter can be discontinued, a culture of a voided mid-stream urine specimen should be obtained prior to the initiation of antimicrobial therapy to help guide treatment [235]. Long-term indwelling catheters should not be changed routinely. Follow appropriate practices for catheter insertion and care [279]. 3.8.4.8. Recommendations for disease management and prevention of CA-UTI Summary of evidenceLEA systematic review of nineteen different interventions to reduce UTI including catheter discontinuation and limiting catheterisation in nursing home patients reported successful CA-UTI reduction and reduced catheter usage.1bA meta-analysis of seven studies investigating RCTs comparing hydrophilic coated to PVC (standard) catheters for IC found a statistically lower risk ratio (0.84) for the frequency of UTI in the hydrophilic catheter group.1aA meta-analysis showed overall benefit for use of prophylaxis for reduction of infective complications after catheter removal; however, results from individual trials were inconsistent with five out of seven trials including the possibility of no benefit.1aA subsequent RCT found no benefit of antibiotic prophylaxis for reduction of infective complications at up to four weeks after catheter removal.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingTreat symptomatic catheter-associated-UTI according to the recommendations for complicated UTI (see section 3.7.5).StrongTake a urine culture prior to initiating antimicrobial therapy in catheterised patients in whom the catheter has been removed.StrongDo not treat catheter-associated asymptomatic bacteriuria in general.StrongTreat catheter-associated asymptomatic bacteriuria prior to traumatic urinary tract interventions (e.g. transurethral resection of the prostate).StrongReplace or remove the indwelling catheter before starting antimicrobial therapy.StrongDo not apply topical antiseptics or antimicrobials to the catheter, urethra or meatus.StrongDo not use prophylactic antimicrobials to prevent catheter-associated UTIs.StrongDo not routinely use antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent clinical UTI after urethral catheter removal.WeakThe duration of catheterisation should be minimal.StrongUse hydrophilic coated catheters to reduce CA-UTI.StrongDo not routinely use antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent clinical UTI after urethral catheter removal or in patients performing intermittent self-catheterisationWeak 