3.4.2.2. Neuro-urological rehabilitation. 3.4.2.2.1. Bladder rehabilitation including electrical stimulation The term bladder rehabilitation summarises treatment options that aim to re-establish bladder function in patients with neuro-urological symptoms. Strong contraction of the urethral sphincter and/or pelvic floor, as well as anal dilatation, manipulation of the genital region, and physical activity inhibit micturition in a reflex manner [134,150]. The first mechanism is affected by activation of efferent nerve fibres, and the latter ones are produced by activation of afferent fibres [110]. Electrical stimulation of the pudendal nerve afferents, strongly inhibits the micturition reflex and detrusor contraction [151]. This stimulation might then support the restoration of the balance between excitatory and inhibitory inputs at the spinal or supraspinal level [134,152]. Evidence for bladder rehabilitation using electrical stimulation in neurological patients is mainly based on small non-comparative studies with a high risk of bias. Behavioural therapy and bladder training: In patients with PD, behavioural therapy and bladder training may be considered based on randomised controlled trials (RCTs) with very limited number of patients [153,154]. Pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT): In patients with MS and stroke, PFMT may have positive effects on LUTS, daytime urinary frequency and urinary incontinence but the evidence is still limited [155,156]. Peripheral temporary electrostimulation: Tibial nerve stimulation and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) might be effective and safe for treating neurogenic LUT dysfunction, but more reliable evidence from well-designed RCTs is required to reach definitive conclusions [152,157,158]. In post-stroke patients TENS has been shown to effectively improve urodynamic and bladder diary findings as well as QoL [159-161]. In an RCT, transcutaneous tibial nerve home stimulation has proven to significantly improve bladder diary parameters in patients with MS as well as in women with PD [162,163]. In acute SCI, TENS is able to achieve bladder neuromodulation via modulation of the autonomous nervous system functions [164]. Greater volumes until full sensation, less detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia and an increased bladder capacity can be found when compared to sham-treated patients [165]. A SR on dorsal genital nerve stimulation showed higher relative and absolute bladder capacities and inhibition of detrusor hyperactivity in SCI people, although these therapeutic effects may be dependent on the current, amplitude and longer periods of stimulation [166]. Interferential medium frequency current electrical stimulation for SCI patients with American spinal cord injury association impairment scale (AIS) levels B, C and D demonstrated a significant decrease in PVR and volume of urine leakage between catheterisation [167]. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation applied in the sacral area has also improved the performance in symptoms scores in highly selected patients with UI after stroke [160]; however, new RCTs with more patients and longer follow-up are required. Peripheral temporary electrostimulation combined with pelvic floor muscle training and biofeedback: In MS patients, combining active neuromuscular electrical stimulation with Pelvic Floor Muscle Training (PFMT) and EMG biofeedback can achieve a substantial reduction of neuro-urological symptoms [168,169]. This treatment combination seems to be more effective than either therapy alone [170,171]. However, the combination of intravaginal electrostimulation and PFMT was not superior to PFMT alone in reducing UI in women with incomplete SCI [172]. Intravesical electrostimulation: Intravesical electrostimulation can increase bladder capacity and improve bladder filling sensation in patients with incomplete SCI or myelomeningocele (MMC) [173]. In patients with neurogenic detrusor underactivity, intravesical electrostimulation may also improve voiding and reduce residual volume [174,175]. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation: Although improvement of neuro-urological symptoms has been described in PD, SCI and MS patients, this technique is still under investigation [176]. The role of cortical as well as sacral magnetic stimulation in MS patients with underactive bladder needs to be better defined [177]. Summary: To date, bladder rehabilitation techniques are mainly based on electrical or magnetic stimulation; however, there is a lack of well-designed studies. 