3.4.2.5. Minimally invasive treatment. 3.4.2.5.1. Catheterisation Intermittent self- or third-party catheterisation [236,237] is the preferred management for neuro-urological patients who cannot effectively empty their bladders [134]. An adequate hand function is an independent risk factor for cessation of intermittent catheterisation (IC) [238]. It has not yet been established whether or not the incidence of UTI, other complications and user satisfaction are affected by either sterile, aseptic or clean IC, coated or uncoated catheters or by any other catheter type [239]. Sterile IC cannot be considered a routine procedure [134,240] and careful counselling should be employed before commencing IC. In those with MS, commencing IC increases UTI rate over one year by seven fold, without improvement in QoL or symptom score [241]. In addition, in those with SCI, dissatisfaction (and discontinuation) is associated with increased UTI frequency, as well as being of the female sex [242]. It is worth considering patient satisfaction and subsequent compliance when instigating and continuing IC. Shared decision making is imperative, as although IC has better medical outcomes than indwelling catheterisation, in the SCI population it is associated with worse reported QoL compared to indwelling catheters, especially if recurrent (> 4 per year) UTIs complicate management [61,243]. The use of hydrophilic catheters is associated with a lower rate of UTI [244]. An observational study found that of the 56.9% of patients who used IC 42.1% of patients discontinued IC within 12 months with inconvenience (36%), leakage (20%) and increased infections (19%) listed as the main reasons for the discontinuation [243]. To minimise the risk of UTI in neuro-urological patients, it is important that patient should be adequately taught to self-catheterise [134,245-249]. The average frequency of catheterisations per day is four to six times [250] and the catheter size most often used is between 12-16 Fr. In aseptic IC, an optimum frequency of five times showed a reduction of UTI [250]. Ideally, bladder volume at catheterisation should, as a rule, not exceed 400-500 mL. Indwelling transurethral catheterisation and, to a lesser extent, suprapubic cystostomy are associated with a range of complications as well as an enhanced risk for UTI [134,251-258]; therefore, both procedures should be avoided, when possible. Silicone catheters are preferred as they are less susceptible to encrustation and because of the high incidence of latex allergy in the neuro-urological patient population [259]. Bladder cancer might be an increased risk in the general population with an indwelling catheter including neuro-urological patients, and clinicians should promptly investigate patients with the standard red flags for bladder cancer [258,260]. 3.4.2.5.2. Summary of evidence and recommendations for catheterisation Summary of evidenceLEIntermittent catheterisation is the standard treatment for patients who are unable to empty their bladder.3Indwelling transurethral catheterisation and suprapubic cystostomy are associated with a range of complications as well as an enhanced risk for UTI.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingUse intermittent catheterisation as a standard treatment for patients who are unable to empty their bladder.StrongThoroughly instruct patients in the technique and risks of intermittent catheterisation.StrongAvoid indwelling transurethral and suprapubic catheterisation whenever possible.Strong 3.4.2.5.3. Intravesical drug treatment To reduce NDO, antimuscarinics can also be administered intravesically [261]. The efficacy and tolerability of intravesical administration of oxybutynin hydrochloride for treatment of NDO has been demonstrated in a recent randomised controlled study [211]. This approach may reduce adverse effects due to the fact that the antimuscarinic drug is metabolised differently [262] and a greater amount is sequestered in the bladder, even more than with electromotive administration [263]. The vanilloids, capsaicin and resiniferatoxin, desensitise the C-fibres for a period of a few months [264,265]. Clinical studies have shown that resiniferatoxin has limited clinical efficacy compared to botulinum toxin A injections in the detrusor [264]. Although preliminary data suggest that intravesical vanilloids might be effective for treating neurological LUT dysfunction, their safety profile appears to be unfavourable [222]. Currently, there is no indication for the use of these substances, which are not licensed for intravesical treatment. 3.4.2.5.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for intravesical drug treatment Summary of evidenceLEA significant reduction in adverse events was observed for intravesical administration of oxybutynin compared to oral administration.1a RecommendationStrength ratingOffer intravesical oxybutynin to neurogenic detrusor overactivity patients with poor tolerance to the oral route.Strong 3.4.2.5.5. Botulinum toxin injections in the bladder Botulinum toxin A causes a long-lasting but reversible chemical denervation that lasts for about nine months [266,267]. The toxin injections are mapped over the detrusor in a dosage that depends on the preparation used. Botulinum toxin A has been proven effective in patients with neuro-urological disorders due to MS, SCI and PD in multiple RCTs and meta-analyses [268-271]. In mid- to long-term follow-up, 50%-70% of the patients continue botulinum toxin treatment [272-274]. Urodynamic studies might be necessary after treatment in order to monitor the effect of the injections on bladder pressure [275]. Repeated injections seem to be possible without loss of efficacy, even after initial low response rates, based on years of follow-up [266,276-279]. The clinical efficacy of botulinum toxin A injection in patients with low morbidity after failure of augmentation enterocystoplasty has been demonstrated [280,281]. The effectiveness of the different toxin variations seems to be comparable [282,283]. A switch between different toxin variations may improve responsiveness [284]. The most frequent side effects are UTIs, urinary retention and haematuria [285]. Intermittent catheterisation may become necessary, this is especially relevant in MS patients as they do not often perform IC prior to intravesical botulinum toxin injections. However, a lower dose of botulinum toxin A (100 U) may reduce the rate of IC in MS patients [286]. Rare complications include generalised muscle weakness and AD [285]. Including the trigone has been suggested to be more effective than trigone-sparing injection [287]. Current research focuses on different delivery approaches to injection such as liposome encapsulated botulinum toxin to decrease side effects [288]. Neuro-urological patients with an indwelling catheter and concomitant bladder pain and/or catheter bypass leakage could benefit from intravesical botulinum injections [289]. 3.4.2.5.6. Bladder neck and urethral procedures Reduction of the bladder outlet resistance: This may be necessary to protect the UUT. This can be achieved by chemical denervation of the sphincter or by surgical interventions (bladder neck or sphincter incision or urethral stent – Section 3.4.3.1). However, high rates of long-term complications are still noted after the procedures. Patients should be fully aware about the high risk of urinary incontinence which can be the main reason of dissatisfaction although its management with external devices [290] (Section 3.4.2.1). Botulinum toxin A: This can be used to treat DSD effectively by injecting the sphincter at a dose that depends on the preparation used. An improvement of patient reported outcomes has been described in DSD patients with cervical, incomplete SCI, detrusor overactivity and partial hand function [291]. Detrusor sphincter dyssynergia is abolished only for a few months, necessitating repeat injections. The benefit of this treatment has been reported to be limited with mild AEs [292]. However, a recent SR concluded that, because of limited evidence, future RCTs assessing the effectiveness of botulinum toxin A injections also need to address the uncertainty about the optimal dose and mode of injection [293]. In addition, this therapy is not licensed.Increasing bladder outlet resistance: This can improve the continence condition. However, despite early positive results with urethral bulking agents, a relative early loss of continence is reported in patients with neuro-urological disorders [134,294,295].Urethral inserts: Urethral plugs or valves for the management of (female) stress incontinence have not been applied in neuro-urological patients. The experience with active pumping urethral prosthesis for treatment of the underactive or acontractile detrusor were disappointing [296]. 3.4.2.5.7. Summary of evidence and recommendations for botulinum toxin A injections Summary of evidenceLEBotulinum toxin A has been proven effective in patients with neuro-urological disorders due to MS or SCI in multiple RCTs and meta-analyses.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingUse botulinum toxin injection in the detrusor to reduce neurogenic detrusor overactivity in multiple sclerosis or spinal cord injury patients if antimuscarinic therapy is ineffective.Strong 