3.4.2.1. Assisted bladder emptying - Credé manoeuvre, Valsalva manoeuvre, triggered reflex voiding. Incomplete bladder emptying is a serious risk factor for UTI, high intravesical pressure and incontinence. Methods to improve the voiding process should therefore be practiced. Bladder expression: The downwards movement of the lower abdomen by suprapubic compression (Credé) or by abdominal straining (Valsalva) leads to an increase in intravesical pressure, and generally also causes a reflex sphincter contraction [142,143]. The latter may increase bladder outlet resistance and lead to inefficient emptying. The high pressures created during these procedures are hazardous for the urinary tract [144,145]. Therefore, their use should be discouraged unless urodynamics show that the intravesical pressure remains within safe limits [134]. Long-term complications are unavoidable for both methods of bladder emptying [143]. The already weak pelvic floor function may be further impaired, thus introducing or exacerbating already existing SUI [145]. Triggered reflex voiding: Stimulation of the sacral or lumbar dermatomes in patients with a upper motor neuron lesion can elicit a reflex detrusor contraction [145]. The risk of high pressure voiding is present and interventions to decrease outlet resistance may be necessary [146]. Triggering can induce AD, especially in patients with high level SCI (at or above Th 6) [147]. All assisted bladder emptying techniques require low outlet resistance. Even then, high detrusor pressures may still be present. Hence, patients need dedicated education and close urodynamic and urological surveillance [145,148,149]. Note: In the literature, including some of the references cited here, the concept “reflex voiding” is sometimes used to cover all three assisted voiding techniques described in this section. External appliances: Social continence may be achieved by collecting urine during incontinence, for instance using pads. Condom catheters with urine collection devices are a practical method for men [134]. The penile clamp is absolutely contraindicated in case of NDO or low bladder compliance due to the risk of developing high intravesical pressure and pressure sores/necrosis in cases of altered/absent sensations. 