6.7.2. Management of mCRPC - general aspects. Selection of treatment for mCRPC is multifactorial and in general dependent on: previous treatment for mHSPC and for non-mHSPC;previous treatment for nmCRPC and mCRPC;quality of response and pace of progression on previous treatment;known cross resistance between androgen receptor pathway inhibitor (ARPI);co-medication and known drug interactions (see approved summary of product characteristics);known genetic alterations and microsatellite instability–high (MSI-H)/mismatch repair–deficient (dMMR) status;known histological variants and DNA repair deficiency (to consider platinum or targeted therapy like PARPi);local approval status of drugs and reimbursement situation;available clinical trials;The patient and his comorbidities. 6.7.2.1. Molecular diagnostics All metastatic patients should be offered somatic genomic testing for homologous repair and MMR defects early on, preferably before firstline mCRPC treatment is established. Testing should preferably be performed on metastatic carcinoma tissue but testing on primary tumour may also be performed. Alternatively, but still less common, genetic testing on circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) is an option and has been used in some trials. One test, the FoundationOne® Liquid CDx, has been FDA approved [1157]. Defective MMR assessment can be performed by IHC for MMR proteins (MSH2, MSH6, MLH1 and PMS2) and/or by next generation sequencing (NGS) assays [1158]. Germline testing for BRCA1/2, ATM and MMR is recommended for high-risk- and particularly for metastatic PCa if clinically indicated. Molecular diagnostics should be performed by a certified (accredited) institution using a standard NGS multiplication procedure (minimum depth of coverage of 200 X). The genes and respective exons should be listed; not only DNA for mutations but RNA needs to be examined for fusions and protein expression to obtain all clinically relevant information. A critical asset is the decision support helping to rate the mutations according to their clinical relevance [1159,1160]. Level 1 evidence for the use of PARP-inhibitors has been reported [248,1161,1162]. Microsatellite instability (MSI)-high (or MMR deficiency) is rare in PCa, but for those patients, pembrolizumab has been approved by the FDA and could be a valuable additional treatment option [1080,1163]. Germline molecular testing is discussed in Section 5.1.6 - Genetic testing for inherited PCa. Recommendations for germline testing are provided in Section 5.1.7. 