4.9.3. Diagnostic evaluation. The commonly encountered symptoms for urethral diverticulum such as pain, urgency, frequency, recurrent UTIs, vaginal discharge, dyspareunia, voiding difficulties or UI [748], are common to many other LUT dysfunctions. Consequently, there is no pathognomonic cluster of symptoms to identify urethral diverticulum. Many patients with urethral diverticulum are asymptomatic. However, urethral diverticulum often presents with a palpable urethral mass. It may be possible to express a purulent exudate from the urethra. Occasionally a stone may develop within the diverticulum. Urethral diverticulum can be diagnosed by physical examination, VCUG and MRI. Other investigations include urethrocystoscopy, endocavitary (often transvaginal or sometimes transurethral) pelvic floor US and double balloon urethrography. No robust diagnostic accuracy studies have addressed the question of the best test to confirm the diagnosis in women with clinical suspicion of urethral diverticulum. A case series of 27 patients concluded that endoluminal (vaginal or rectal) MRI has better diagnostic accuracy than VCUG [749] and determines the size and extent of urethral diverticulum more accurately. A case series of 60 patients reported that the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and negative predictive value of MRI was 100%, 83%, 92% and 100%, respectively [750]. Another case series reported 100% specificity and sensitivity of MRI in 60 patients [751]. However, a case series of 41 patients reported a 25% discrepancy between MRI and surgical findings [752]. Endoluminal MRI with either a vaginal or rectal coil may provide even better image quality than simple MRI [753]. Magnetic resonance imaging is the gold standard for the diagnosis and planning of surgical repair and is also useful in diagnosing diverticular inflammation or tumour [754,755]. Urethrocystoscopy can be used to visualise the ostia of the diverticula. Knowledge of the ostias’ location and number can assist with surgical planning since they need to be closed after diverticulectomy. However, given the challenges of urethroscopy in women, the ostia are only seen in 42% of cases [748]. If VCUG is performed, antero-posterior and lateral images are required to optimally characterise the configuration of the diverticulum. There is a high risk of false negatives since the ostia of the diverticula must be patent and the patients must be able to void during the study. In more complex diverticula where there is septation, the entire diverticulum may not be visualised underestimating its complexity or size [756]. The sensitivity of VCUG is 73.5% which is significantly worse than MRI [748]. Ultrasound can be performed transabdominally, trans-vaginally or trans-perineally to identify the diverticulum. In particular, the transvaginal approach allows imaging of the urethra from the meatus to the bladder neck in several planes and can identify the number, size, location, and contents of the diverticulum. This technique is challenging and requires a skilled ultrasonographer. Additionally, the probe can compress the urethra, causing distortion [756]. A meta-analysis reported that US of any kind had a sensitivity of 82.0%, which was inferior to that of MRI [756]. However, a recent publication on trans-labial US reported a sensitivity of 95% [757]; therefore, this approach may be explored further by researchers in the future. For patients who cannot undergo MRI and those in whom the ostia cannot be seen on cystoscopy, double balloon urethrography is an option. Sensitivity of 94.7% has been reported, which is comparable to that of MRI, but it is technically difficult, requires an experienced radiologist/radiographer and specialised equipment, can be painful for the patient and carries a risk of UTI. Given the current popularity of other imaging modalities, many units may not have access to this technique [756]. 4.9.3.1. Associated voiding dysfunction Although the presentation of urethral diverticulum is often non-specific and variable, urethral diverticulum can be associated with voiding dysfunction and SUI or UUI. One recent series reported SUI in 60% of patients with urethral diverticulum [758]. Urethral diverticulum is most often located at the level of the mid-urethra. This location often overlaps with the external sphincter. However, urethral diverticulum may also extend proximally toward the bladder neck in the vicinity of the proximal sphincter mechanism. This morphology may, in part, explain the association between urethral diverticulum and SUI, with potentially more proximal lesions at risk for postoperative SUI [759]. Urethral diverticulum may also be associated with BOO due to the mass effect of the urethral diverticulum, urinary retention, or urgency and UUI [760]. Pain and dysuria associated with urethral diverticulum may also result in acquired voiding dysfunction. Pressure–flow studies may have a role in the preoperative assessment of patients with urethral diverticula and coexisting voiding dysfunction or SUI [741,761-763]. Indeed, urodynamics may evaluate coexisting detrusor dysfunction or document the presence of SUI or obstruction prior to repair [764,765]. Urethral pressure profilometry has also been used in the assessment or diagnosis of urethral diverticulum, noting a biphasic pattern, or pressure drop at the level of the lesion [761,763,766]. Video-urodynamics may be helpful in differentiating SUI from paradoxical UI due to fluid accumulation in the urethral diverticulum. Additionally, resting and straining images obtained during fluoroscopic imaging may document an open bladder neck at rest. This may be a consideration in some patients with an extensive urethral diverticulum at the level of the mid-urethra, and potential implications for postoperative UI due to compromise of both sphincter mechanisms. 