4.9.4. Disease management. For women with minimal symptoms who would prefer to avoid invasive treatment, conservative management can be considered. Patients should be warned of the small risk of cancer (1–6%) within the diverticulum [767,768]. 4.9.4.1. Surgical treatment No RCTs have investigated the effectiveness of surgery in women who have a bothersome urethral diverticulum. Thorough evaluation of the anatomy of the diverticulum is essential in planning reconstructive surgery. There are three surgical approaches to treatment of diverticulum: marsupialisation, endoscopic incision, and curative treatment with diverticulectomy. Surgical removal (diverticulectomy) is the most commonly reported treatment in contemporary case series. The principles of successful transvaginal diverticulectomy are to: dissect a well-vascularised vaginal flap; preserve the peri-urethral fascia for closure; remove all the diverticular wall; excise the ostium and close the urethra in a watertight fashion; close the incision in a multi-layered fashion with no overlapping suture lines; and preservation or creation of continence. The decision to use a labial fat pad flap (commonly known as a Martius flap) varies, and the flap is used more frequently in the following situations: recurrent cases, large urethral defects or for deficient vaginal flaps for closure [742,746] transection of the urethra required for access to a circumferential diverticulum [755] or in the case of complex configuration [760], and if there is a planned future sling procedure required for UI to facilitate the dissection at that time [742]. Marsupialisation involves incision into the mass on the vaginal side to drain the infected contents. The wall is sutured open with absorbable suture to allow drainage and prevent reaccumulating of infectious materials. This approach leaves the cystic structure in place and can theoretically cause a urethro-vaginal fistula because there is communication with the diverticular ostium, but it is a rapid procedure with little dissection required. This approach has been advocated in pregnant patients to decompress the diverticulum and allow safe vaginal delivery. A small case series suggested that 75% of pregnant women with urethral diverticula managed expectantly eventually required postpartum surgery [769]. Endoscopic incision is a rarely reported treatment option [770,771]. This procedure involves finding the narrow neck of the ostium and incising it with a resectoscope. This unroofing of the diverticulum transforms the narrow communication with the urethra that causes symptoms when it becomes obstructed into a wide-mouthed sac that drains freely. 4.9.4.2. Management of concomitant stress urinary incontinence Many women present with concomitant SUI and urethral diverticulum and may request both conditions to be simultaneously treated. A meta-analysis reported that diverticulectomy cured SUI even without a concomitant anti-incontinence procedure. However, no data regarding symptom severity were given and it could be assumed that many of these cured patients had less-severe UI before surgery [748]. Therefore, additional surgical correction may be required [759,771]. However, there is no consensus on appropriate timing of surgical management of these two conditions. Thus, patients with symptomatic bothersome SUI in association with urethral diverticulum may be offered simultaneous anti-UI surgery. Although historical series have shown good results with concomitant bladder neck suspension [765], more contemporary series have utilised pubovaginal fascial slings, with satisfactory outcomes [772-775]. Synthetic MUS are not recommended as a concomitant anti-UI procedure at the time of urethral diverticulectomy [776]. Synthetic material adjacent to a fresh suture line following diverticulectomy in the setting of potentially infected urine may place the patient at higher risk for subsequent urethral erosion and vaginal extrusion of the sling material, as well as urethro-vaginal fistula formation and foreign body granuloma formation. 4.9.4.3. Success rate and complications Transvaginal urethral diverticulectomy has a high success rate (defined by being dry) of 84–98%, with a reoperation rate of 2–13% after primary repair during a mean follow-up of twelve to 50 months [739,742,759,777]. The resolution of symptoms after surgery has been reported to reach 68.8% but less than half of studies comment on symptom improvement [778]. One case series reported a recurrence rate of 33% in U-shaped and of 60% in circumferential diverticula within one year [746], one study found a 10.7% recurrence rate in 122 women undergoing diverticulectomy, with a higher risk of recurrence in those with proximal or multiple diverticula or after previous pelvic surgery [779] or radiation. Recurrent urethral diverticulum following initial successful urethral diverticulectomy may occur as a result of a new infection or traumatic insult such as childbirth, a new urethral diverticulum, or recurrence of the original lesion. Recurrence may be due to incomplete removal of the urethral diverticulum, inadequate closure of the urethra, residual dead space (circumferential diverticula), or other technical factors. Repeat urethral diverticulectomy represents a unique challenge due to altered anatomy, scarring, and difficulty identifying proper anatomical planes. One case series reported that storage symptoms decreased significantly postoperatively from 60% to 16% following surgery for urethral diverticulum [759]. Other series with long-term follow-up, however, have demonstrated rates of postoperative urgency of 54% [779], and de novo UUI in 36% of patients [771]. Such postoperative symptoms indicate persistence of urethral diverticulum, recurrence of urethral diverticulum, or de novo OAB syndrome or urethral obstruction. Stress urinary incontinence can be worsened or occur de novo after diverticulectomy. This is most likely due to sphincteric damage from the dissection or scarification preventing urethral closure. De novo SUI (10.6% of women) seems to be more common in proximal and large (> 30 mm) diverticula [759]. However, a retrospective review noted at least some de novo SUI in 49% of patients following urethral diverticulectomy; most of which was minor and did not require additional therapy [780]. Only 10% of these individuals underwent subsequent SUI surgery. Treatment for SUI after diverticulectomy is not well described in the literature. The most commonly reported operation is an autologous pubovaginal sling [770] followed by retropubic suspension [771]. However, there are two reported cases of synthetic mesh sling to treat SUI, without mesh complications [746,759], but this is controversial. Early common postoperative complications include UTI (0–39%), de novo SUI (3.8–33%), and de novo urinary retention (0–9%), especially in the setting of concomitant placement of an autologous pubovaginal sling [739,742,759,777]. Delayed complications such as urethral stricture are reported in 0–5.2% of cases [739,742,771,777]. Urethro-vaginal fistula is a devastating complication presenting in 0.9–8.3% of cases [781]. A distal fistula located beyond the sphincteric mechanism can present with split urinary stream or vaginal voiding and may not require repair. However, a fistula located anywhere from the mid-urethra to the bladder neck may result in UI. These patients should undergo repair with consideration of an adjuvant tissue flap, such as a Martius flap, to aid in closure. The timing of the fistula repair is not well defined, with a delay of three to six months after the initial repair being a good balance between patient discomfort and optimal tissue quality. Rare complications include: distal urethral necrosis, bladder injury, urethral injury, ureteric injury, and vaginal scarring or narrowing with consequent dyspareunia [781]. 4.9.4.4. Pathological findings Most urethral diverticula are lined with squamous cells, urothelium or columnar epithelium [742,782,783]. In a meta-analysis, there was a high prevalence of chronic or acute inflammation (68.6%) and the most commonly reported lesions were nephrogenic metaplasia, which occurred in 8% of cases. Diverticula may undergo neoplastic alterations (6%), including invasive adenocarcinoma [784], followed by squamous cell carcinoma in 0.7%. It is unknown if the diverticulum forms first and then transforms into a malignancy or if the malignancy develops first. These malignancies are treated in a similar fashion to urethral cancer in women. 