8.3. Time schedule for surveillance. Although, based on low level evidence only, some follow-up schedules have been suggested, guided by the principle that recurrences tend to occur within the first years following initial treatment. A schedule suggested by the EAU Guidelines Panel includes a CT scan (every 6 months) until the third year, followed by annual imaging thereafter. Patients with multifocal disease, NMIBC with CIS or positive ureteral margins are at higher risk of developing UTUC, which can develop late (> 3 years). In those cases, monitoring of the UUT is mandatory during follow-up. Computed tomography is to be used for imaging of the UUT [587]. The exact time to stop follow-up is not well known and recently a risk-adapted schedule has been proposed, based on the interaction between recurrence risk and competing health factors that could lead to individualised recommendations and may increase recurrence detection. Elderly and very low-risk patients (those with NMIBC or pT0 disease at final cystectomy report) showed a higher competing risk of non-BC mortality when compared with their level of BC recurrence risk. On the other hand, patients with locally-advanced disease or LN involvement are at a higher risk of recurrence for more than 20 years [589]. However, this model has not been validated, does not differentiate between pure UC or variant histologies, and does not incorporate several risk factors related to non-BC mortality. Subtype tumours (including urothelial subtypes, non-urothelial subtypes, and mixed subtypes) might be associated with a greater recurrence risk than pure UC. Recently, a different follow-up scheme for patients with subtype tumours has been proposed [590]. In case of pT0 patients with previous subtype in TURB or in those in the age range between 60 and 79 years, the follow-up should be longer than in pure UC since the risk of recurrence persists over time. Similar to pure UC, patients older than 80 years with subtype tumours might not need oncologic surveillance given the higher risk of non-BC mortality compared to the risk of recurrence whereas patients younger than 60 years should be offered extended surveillance (> 10 years) since the risk of recurrence will exceed that of non-BC mortality [590]. Future prospective studies are needed to answer the question whether a more intense follow- up for subtypes should be considered. Furthermore, the prognostic implications of the different sites of recurrence should be considered. Local and systemic recurrences have a poor prognosis and early detection of the disease will not influence survival [591]. Despite this, the rationale for a risk-adapted schedule for BC surveillance appears to be promising and deserves further investigation. Since data for follow-up strategies are sparse, a number of key questions were included in a recently held consensus project [81,82]. Outcomes for all statements for which consensus was achieved are listed in Section 8.6. 