4.4.1. Epidemiology, aetiology, pathophysiology. 4.4.1.1. Epidemiology Underactive bladder as an entity remains difficult to characterise, partly because its corresponding urodynamic correlate, DU, remains loosely defined, leading to significant variability in diagnostic criteria across research studies and significant overlap of symptoms with other conditions. As a consequence of the variable definition, reported prevalence also varies and ranges from 12-45% in women, with increased prevalence seen with age [75] and in institutionalised elderly women [457]. Several studies have demonstrated similar prevalence rates for DU in the ambulatory setting of around12–19% [458-460]. As would be expected, voiding symptoms consistent with UAB are higher. In a large cross-sectional, population-based internet survey conducted in the USA, UK and Sweden including 15,861 women aged > 40 years, 20.1% had weak flow, 27.4% had incomplete bladder emptying and 38.3% had terminal dribbling [5]. Both DO during filling and DU in the voiding phase of urodynamic studies can co-exist (formerly known as detrusor hyperactivity with impaired contractility [DHIC]) and one study showed the prevalence of this finding was over 30% in elderly women [457]. 4.4.1.2. Aetiology The presence of DU in diverse clinical groups suggests multifactorial aetiology [461]. Idiopathic DU is probably partly an age-dependent decrease in detrusor contractility with no other identifiable causes, but young women can also have DU. There are many secondary causes of DU, including neurogenic (e.g., multiple sclerosis, multiple systemic atrophy, spinal cord injury, spina bifida, Parkinson’s disease, hydrocephalus, transverse myelitis, stroke, Guillain–Barré syndrome, diabetes mellitus, and pelvic nerve injury), myogenic (prolonged bladder overdistension, diabetes mellitus, and BOO) and iatrogenic (pelvic surgery) causes [462]. 4.4.1.3. Pathophysiology Many pathways are involved in normal detrusor contraction, and there are different possible sites of dysfunction [75] with a variety of mechanisms involved in UAB (see Figure 1): Central circuits and centres (prefrontal cortex, periaqueductal gray, pontine micturition centre and hypothalamus): failure of integration or processing.Efferent pathways (sacral cord, sacral nerves, pelvic nerves, and postganglionic neurons): impaired detrusor activation.Afferent pathways (peripheral afferent nerves, anterolateral white column, and posterior column): early termination of voiding reflex.Muscle (detrusor myocytes and extracellular matrix): loss of intrinsic contractility. Different aetiologies can share common pathophysiological mechanisms: for example, diabetes mellitus affects mainly afferent pathways and the detrusor muscle; and neurogenic diseases affect central circuits and efferent/afferent pathways. Figure 1: Management and treatment of women presenting with urinary incontinence, site of dysfunction, major aetiological factors, mechanisms*Figure reproduced with permission from the publisher, from Osman N. et al. [785] 