4.4.4. Disease management. As there are different possible causes and pathogenic mechanisms involved in female UAB, preventive and therapeutic strategies are difficult to define. Among preventive strategies, early recognition after major surgery or labour might prevent long-term problems associated with prolonged bladder over-distension. Nerve-sparing techniques for radical pelvic surgery are more favourable in terms of early recovery of bladder function [476,477]. Treatment of female DU includes strategies to ensure bladder drainage, increase bladder contraction, decrease urethral resistance, or a combination of the two [474]. The management goals for UAB are to improve symptoms and QoL, to reduce the risk of complications, and to identify situations where interventions may not be appropriate. 4.4.4.1. Conservative management 4.4.4.1.1. Behavioural interventions Regular or timed voiding in women with impaired bladder sensations have been done to avoid bladder over-distention. Assisted voiding by abdominal straining with adequate relaxation of the PFM, double or triple voiding are potential strategies to improve bladder emptying. However, none of these manoeuvres has proven efficacy in an RCT. Furthermore, there is a possible association between voiding by excessive abdominal straining and the risk of POP [478]. A small retrospective study in women with neurogenic acontractile detrusor secondary to spina bifida showed that Valsalva voiding may increase the risk of rectal prolapse compared with CISC [479]. 4.4.4.1.2. Pelvic floor muscle relaxation training with biofeedback There are no RCTs on PFM relaxation training in adult women with UAB. Contrary to common beliefs, one study found significant relaxation of the PFMs after contraction [480] and another study found that PFM relaxation training over time increased the speed of relaxation after a single contraction [481]. There is some evidence from the paediatric literature, including one RCT that compared efficacy of PFM relaxation with biofeedback plus combined therapy (including hydration, scheduled voiding, toilet training and diet) vs. combined therapy alone in children with non-neuropathic UAB and voiding dysfunction. Mean number of voiding episodes was significantly increased in the relaxation training group compared with the group with only combined treatment. Post-void residual volume and voiding time decreased considerably, whereas maximum urine flow increased significantly in the relaxation group compared with the combined treatment group [482]. 4.4.4.1.3. Clean intermittent self-catheterisation Clean intermittent self-catheterisation is the most commonly used therapy to manage high PVR volume and urinary retention [117]. It reduces the risk of complications such as UTI, UUT deterioration, bladder stones and overflow UI, etc. It has not yet been established whether the incidence of UTI, other complications and user satisfaction, are affected by either sterile or clean intermittent catheterisation (IC), coated or uncoated catheters or by any other strategy [483]. The use of hydrophilic catheters may be associated with a lower rate of UTI, but further evidence is needed, as current data comes from neurogenic patients [484]. The average frequency of catheterisation is four to six times per day [485] and the catheter sizes most often used are 12–16 Fr. In aseptic IC, an optimum frequency of five times showed a reduction of UTI [485]. Frequency of catheterisation needs to be based on individual need and capability, to prevent chronic and repeated over-filling of the bladder [486]. Thorough counselling regarding techniques, frequency, equipment, and adverse effects of CISC should be given to all potential patients in line with good medical practice. For people using CISC, a Cochrane review found no evidence that one type of catheter or regimen of catheterisation was better than another [487]. However, a recent narrative review suggests that, in certain populations, single-use catheters may reduce urethral trauma and UTI [488]. 4.4.4.1.4. Indwelling catheter Indwelling urinary catheter may be an option for some women who have failed all other treatments and are unable to perform CISC. Complications include UTI, stone formation, and urethral damage. Suprapubic catheterisation may be preferable over urethral catheterisation to minimise the risk of urethral trauma and pain [489]. 4.4.4.1.5. Intravesical electrical stimulation Intravesical electrical stimulation (IVES) can be used to improve bladder dysfunction by stimulating A-delta mechanoreceptor afferents but requires intact afferent circuits and healthy detrusor muscle. One retrospective study in sixteen patients (eleven females) found that two-thirds of patients with a weak detrusor after prolonged bladder over-distension regained balanced voiding after IVES due to detrusor reinforcement [490]. 4.4.4.2. Pharmacological management 4.4.4.2.1. Parasympathomimetics Theoretical approaches to UAB pharmacological treatment include direct stimulation of detrusor cell muscarinic receptors using parasympathomimetic agents such as carbachol or bethanechol or acetylcholinesterase inhibitors such as distigmine, pyridostigmine or neostigmine. A SR on the use of parasympathomimetics in patients with UAB included ten RCTs (controls typically received placebo or no treatment). Three studies reported significant improvements relative to the control group, but six did not and one even reported significant worsening of symptoms. There was no evidence for differences between individual drugs, specific uses of such drugs, or in outcome measures [491]. The review concluded that the available studies do not support the use of parasympathomimetic for treating UAB, especially when frequent and/or serious adverse effects (gastrointestinal upset, blurred vision, bronchospasm, and bradycardia) are taken into account. 4.4.4.2.2. Alpha-adrenergic blockers In order to improve bladder emptying, decreasing outlet resistance through sympathetic blockade at the bladder neck/urethra has been investigated. One prospective study with tamsulosin showed similar improvement in terms of uroflowmetry parameters (specifically in the percentage of patients who had a good therapeutic response) in women with BOO (39.4%) or DU (32.7%) [492]. Another longitudinal study including fourteen women with DU showed clinical and urodynamic improvements after tamsulosin [493]. A prospective single-blind RCT in female patients with DU compared the efficacy of alpha-blocker, cholinergic drugs, or combination therapy, with the latter exhibiting the best results [494]. 4.4.4.2.3. Prostaglandins Prostaglandins are prokinetic agents that promote smooth muscle contraction. Prostaglandins E2 and F2 have been used intravesically to treat urinary retention after surgery. A Cochrane review showed a significant association between intravesical prostaglandin and successful voiding among postoperative patients with urinary retention. However, the success rate was low (32%) with wide 95% CI, compared to placebo. The RCTs included in the pooled analysis were underpowered with methodological limitations and the event rate was very low, indicating a very low certainty of the evidence [495]. Intravesical prostaglandin treatment is rarely used, and further research is necessary before it can be taken up more widely. 4.4.4.3. Surgical management 4.4.4.3.1. Sacral nerve stimulation Sacral nerve stimulation is often used for therapy of non-obstructive urinary retention. The mechanism of action has not been fully elucidated, but activation of afferent sensory pathways, modulation–activation of the central nervous system, and inhibition of inappropriate activation of the guarding reflex are some of the mechanisms proposed. An RCT included 37 patients in the implantation arm and 31 in the standard medical therapy arm, showing a mean decrease in PVR volume and a mean increase in voided PVR volume compared to standard treatment [496]. A meta-analysis of seven studies also showed a mean difference in PVR volume reduction of 236 mL and a mean voided volume increase of 299 mL [497]. The response rate during the trial phase ranged from 33-90% (mean 54.2%) and the success rate of permanent implantation ranged from 55-100% (mean 73.9%), highlighting that patient selection is crucial [498]. The importance of careful patient selection has been emphasised with one study suggesting women with evidence of anatomical BOO, suspected loss of intrinsic detrusor contractility or neurogenic bladder dysfunction show lower response rates [499]. 4.4.4.3.2. Onabotulinumtoxin A OnabotulinumtoxinA intersphincteric injections in external striated urethral sphincter may improve voiding in patients with DU by reducing outlet resistance and reducing the guarding reflex. Some retrospective case studies have shown improvement in voiding symptoms, recovery of spontaneous voiding, and improvement in urodynamic parameters (reduction of voiding pressure and/or urethral closure pressures, reduced PVR volume) [500,501]. The duration of symptomatic relief is short; typically, three months but the reported incidence of de novo SUI is low. 4.4.4.3.3. Transurethral incision of the bladder neck Transurethral incision of the bladder neck has been described in a small series of women with refractory DU. In a retrospective case study, 40/82 (48.8%) women achieved satisfactory outcomes (spontaneous voiding with voiding efficiency > 50%), but five (6.1%) patients developed SUI and two (2.4%) developed a vesico-vaginal fistula [502]. 4.4.4.3.4. Myoplasty One retrospective multicentre study reported the long-term results of latissimus dorsi detrusor myoplasty in patients with bladder acontractility, with 71% recovering complete spontaneous voiding, with a mean PVR volume of 25 mL [503]. No other groups have published their experience to reproduce these findings. 4.4.4.4. Summary of therapeutic evidence on detrusor underactivity The level of evidence for most therapeutic interventions for DU is low. Only CISC remains as a gold standard to reduce the adverse consequences of a high PVR volume and incomplete voiding, in spite of the low level of evidence that supports this statement. 4.4.4.4.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for underactive bladder Summary of evidenceLEAbdominal straining with relaxation of the PFM may improve bladder emptying but increases the risk of POP.3Pelvic floor muscle relaxation training may increase voiding episodes, decrease post-void residual volume and voiding time.3Clean intermittent self-catheterisation has proven efficacy in terms of effecting bladder emptying in patients who are unable to do so.3Indwelling transurethral catheterisation and suprapubic cystostomy are associated with a range of complications as well as an increased risk of UTI.3Intravesical electrical stimulation may be useful in some patients after prolonged bladder over-distension, but long-term efficacy remains unproven.3Parasympathomimetics do not improve clinical or urodynamic parameters of UAB and frequent and/or serious adverse effects may arise.1bAlpha-adrenergic blockers in women with UAB may be effective in improving voided volume and reducing PVR volume.2bVery low certainty evidence indicates that intravesical prostaglandins may promote successful voiding in patients with urinary retention after surgery.1aSacral nerve stimulation improves voided volume and decreases PVR volume in women with DU.1bThere is limited evidence for the effectiveness of onabotulinumtoxinA external urethral sphincter injections to improve voiding in women with UAB.3Transurethral bladder neck incision may improve voiding in women with DU, but complications (SUI, vesico-vaginal fistulae) may occur.3There is very limited evidence for the effectiveness of detrusor myoplasty for bladder acontractility.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingEncourage double voiding in those women who are unable to completely empty their bladder.WeakWarn women with underactive bladder (UAB) who use abdominal straining to improve emptying about pelvic organ prolapse risk.WeakUse clean intermittent self-catheterisation (CISC) as a standard treatment in patients who are unable to empty their bladder.StrongThoroughly instruct patients in the technique and risks of CISC.StrongOffer indwelling transurethral catheterisation and suprapubic cystostomy only when other modalities for urinary drainage have failed or are unsuitable.WeakDo not routinely recommend intravesical electrical stimulation in women with UAB.WeakDo not routinely recommend parasympathomimetics for treatment of women with UAB.StrongOffer alpha-adrenergic blockers before more-invasive techniques.WeakOffer intravesical prostaglandins to women with urinary retention after surgery only in the context of well-regulated clinical trials.WeakOffer onabotulinumtoxinA external sphincter injections before more-invasive techniques as long as patients are informed that the evidence to support this treatment is of low quality.WeakOffer sacral nerve stimulation to women with UAB refractory to conservative treatment.StrongDo not routinely offer detrusor myoplasty as a treatment for DU.Weak 