3.19.4. Management. 3.19.4.1. Prenatal treatment Most cases of PUV are suspected prenatally [1296,1314,1315]. The potential for spontaneous resolution of bladder enlargement, and the timing of renal imaging are the main obstacles for prenatal intervention. As renal dysplasia is irreversible, it is important to identify those fetuses with good renal function [1316]. Prenatal interventions aim to restore amniotic fluid volume and attenuate the risk of pulmonary hypoplasia or further renal damage [1317]. Decision for prenatal intervention can be based on a staging system that is composed of renal ultrasonographic findings, amnion amount and fetal urine biochemistry [1315]. Early intervention (before the age of sixteen weeks of gestation) may be beneficial for the renal function, however making the correct diagnosis and the detection of other severe comorbidities is extremely difficult at this time point [1318]. Later interventions are mostly of benefit for lung development, but not for renal function [1319]. There are however emerging reports of interventions as early as the end of first trimester, with results pointing to a potential preservation of long-term renal function. These reports are still preliminary, the techniques used are intricate and can be associated with a higher risk of foetal demise in these very frail and tiny patients [1320-1322]. Foetal urine samples before 23 weeks of gestation (ß2-microglobulin, sodium, chloride and calcium) may be helpful to distinguish between those who could benefit from intrauterine therapy and those in whom the outcome is most likely to be compromised [1323]. Normal biochemistry; a sodium level below 100 mmol/L, a chloride value of < 90 mmol/L, calcium <8 mg/dL, and ß2-microglobulin <6 mg/L obtained in the first fetal urine sample or biochemistry that improves between two sequential samplings, the latter scenario prompting fetal intervention, was associated with high fetal survival and normal renal function at five years in a small study [1324]. The status of amnion fluid, the appearance of the kidneys as well as the fetal urine biochemistry may be helpful in counselling. Proteomic analysis of fetal urine using a 12 peptide signature expressed in fetuses who go on to develop ESRD by the age of two years, may show promise in assessing CLUTO. This should be considered as experimental. The placing of a vesicoamniotic shunt (VAS) is a prenatal treatment designed to restore amniotic fluid cycling. There is a reported complication rate of 21-59% with dislocation of the shunt being the most common [1317]. The PLUTO-trial (randomised study) failed to show a long-term benefit on renal function by placing a VAS [1325]. A meta-analysis on interventions for CLUTO reported that VAS resulted in a higher perinatal survival rate than conservative management (57.1% vs 38.8%), with no significant differences in six to twelve month survival, two-year survival or postnatal renal function [1326]. Foetal cystoscopy with laser ablation has a high complication rate without evidence for the effectiveness of these interventions [1327]. To avoid the severe complication of the laser ablation, balloon dilation has been tried [1328]. The number of patients and designs of these studies are insufficient to yield any recommendations. Parental information is very important and the natural history of CLUTO including the postnatal outcomes with or without prenatal treatment as well as the uncertainties and/or controversies about CLUTO diagnosis and treatment should be discussed [1317]. 3.19.4.2. Postnatal treatment Bladder drainage Following delivery, the bladder should be drained transurethrally, or suprapubically. This catheter drainage tube can then be used to perform a VCUG to confirm the diagnosis. Valve ablation When the medical situation of the neonate has stabilised, the next step is to perform an endoscopic valve ablation provided the urethra is accessible with available equipment. In cases were the urethra is too small, urinary diversion should be maintained until valve ablation can be performed. Small paediatric cystoscopes and resectoscopes are available either to incise, ablate or to resect the valve at the 5, 7 and/or 12 o’clock positions, depending on the surgeon’s preference. It is important to avoid extensive electrocoagulation, as the most common complication of this procedure is stricture formation. Two studies demonstrated a lower urethral stricture rate using the cold knife compared to diathermy [1329,1330]. Currently, no strong evidence exists to support the use of laser ablation of PUVs; preliminary studies on the use of Holmium YAG and Thulium lasers, show that laser fulguration is safe and effective [1331]. Within the three months following initial treatment, effectiveness of the treatment should be demonstrated either by clinical improvement (ultrasound and renal function), control VCUG or a re-look cystoscopy, depending on the clinical course [1332-1334]. Bladder neck incision Bladder neck incision has been suggested as a means of managing secondary bladder neck obstruction [1335]. There is no current evidence which demonstrates that bladder neck incision has a role in preventing reintervention or rehospitalisation rates, and therefore cannot be recommended as a routine management option. Vesicostomy A vesicostomy is indicated if the child is too small to undergo endoscopic surgery, has failed endoscopic valve ablation, or has shown no clinic-biochemical improvement following valve ablation. This is an alternative to prolonged catheter drainage and has been shown to stabilise/improve the upper tracts in up to 90% cases [1336]. The most prevalent vesicostomy procedure in children was described by Blocksom and modified by Duckett [1337]. Key technical points are to ensure an adequate mobilization of the bladder dome to enable a tension-free anastomosis with the fascia and skin. Common complication following vesicostomy are stomal stenosis, mucosal prolapse, peristomal dermatitis, and bladder calculi. The risk of prolapse is usually due to an extensive bladder mobilization and due to placement of the stoma too inferior on the abdominal wall, allowing the posterior bladder wall to evert through the stoma. High diversion In cases where bladder drainage is insufficient to prevent recurrent infections of the upper tract, improve renal function and/or a decrease upper tract dilatation, high urinary diversion should be considered. The choice of urinary diversion depends on the surgeon’s preference for high loop ureterostomy, ring ureterostomy, end ureterostomy or pyelostomy, with each technique having its advantages and disadvantages [1338-1340]. Diversion can delay progression to end stage renal failure [1341]. Vesicoureteric reflux is very common in PUV patients (up to 72%) and it is described bilaterally in up to 32% [1342]. A prospective observational study identified high grade VUR as an independent risk factor for developing febrile UTIs especially in the first nine months of life, therefore antibiotic prophylaxis should be considered in such patients [1343]. Furthermore, circumcision can be discussed in order to further reduce the risk of UTIs [1343]. In the aforementioned multicentred randomized controlled trial, after two years of follow-up, this study demonstrated a statistically significant effect of circumcision as an adjunct to antibiotic prophylaxis in preventing febrile UTIs. The hazard ratio for developing a febrile UTI in the group with antibiotics alone was 10.3 (95% confidence interval: 1.3–82.5) compared with the combined prophylactic antibiotics and circumcision group. Early administration of oxybutynin may improve bladder function as shown in one study with eighteen patients [1344], and enhances resolution of hydronephrosis and VUR as shown in a randomized controlled study of 49 patients. Oxybutynin treatment had, however no discernible effect on renal function or risk of UTI [1335]. High-grade VUR is usually associated with a poorly functioning kidney however, early removal of a non-functioning renal unit in an asymptomatic patient seems to be unnecessary. Deterioration of renal function without an anatomical obstruction and higher urine output (polyuria) may lead to an overdistension of the bladder during the night. Drainage of the bladder during the night by a catheter may be beneficial for the hydronephrosis as well as for renal function [1345,1346]. Patients with high daytime post void residual urine volumes may benefit from clean intermittent catheterisation (CIC) [1347]. In those who do not want, or are not able to perform CIC via the urethra, the placement of a catheterizable channel is a good alternative [1348]. Clean intermittent catheterization has been shown to delay the onset of dialysis in patients with chronic kidney disease, progressing to ESRD and has also resulted in significantly better ten-year graft survival rates in transplanted patients [1349,1350]. 