3.19.1. Posterior urethral valves. 3.19.1.1. Epidemiology and pathophysiology Posterior urethral valves are one of the few life-threatening congenital anomalies of the urinary tract found during the neonatal period. The risk for chronic kidney disease (CKD) is estimated to reach 32% and 20% for end-stage renal disease (ESRD), as reported in a systemic review [1294]. Up to 17% of paediatric ESRD can be attributed to PUV [1295]. An incidence of PUV of 1 in 7000-8000 live-births has been estimated [1296,1297]. The kidneys start to produce urine at around the tenth week of antenatal life. The intrauterine obstruction leads to a decreased urine output, which could result in oligo- or anhydramnios. Amniotic fluid is necessary for normal development of the lungs and its absence may lead to pulmonary hypoplasia. An obstruction at the level of the urethra affects the whole urinary tract to varying degrees: The prostatic urethra is distended and the ejaculatory ducts may be dilated due to urinary reflux.The bladder neck is hypertrophied and rigid.The hypertrophied bladder may occasionally have multiple diverticulae.Nearly all valve patients have dilatation of the upper urinary tract. This may be due to the valve itself and the high pressure in the bladder, or due to obstruction of the ureterovesical junction by the hypertrophied bladder.If there is secondary VUR, the affected kidney functions poorly in most cases. Secondary VUR is observed in at least 50% of patients with PUV [1298]. It is generally accepted that unilateral high grade VUR associated with ipsilateral renal dysplasia acts as a ‘pressure pop-off valve’, which would protect the contralateral kidney, leading to a better prognosis [1299]. Other types of pop-off mechanism include large bladder diverticulae, urinary extravasation, with or without urinary ascites and a patent urachus [1300]. Protective effects of pop-off phenomena on renal function remain however equivocal, as long-term outcomes from different studies have been discrepant, with some studies showing a protective effect [1301,1302] while others have shown no protective benefit [1303-1305]. A possible explanation for such discrepancy could relate to differences in defining the exact nature of what constitutes a pop-off mechanism. 