3.19.5. Follow-up. Several prognostic factors for the prediction of future renal function have been described. Different serum nadir creatinine levels are given in the literature (0.85 mg/dl – 1.2 mg/dl [μmol/L]) [1313,1351-1354]. Renal parenchymal quantity (total renal parenchymal area) and quality (corticomedullary differentiation and renal echogenicity) on initial postnatal ultrasound also have prognostic value [1355]. Life-long monitoring of these patients is mandatory, as bladder dysfunction (‘valve bladder’) is common and the delay in day- and night-time continence is a significant problem [1356]. Urodynamic studies play an important role in the management of patients with valve bladder especially in those with suspicion of bladder dysfunction [1357,1358], however there is no consensus as to optimal timing or frequency of such studies. Poor bladder sensation and compliance, detrusor overactivity and polyuria (especially at night) and their combination are responsible for bladder dysfunction. In those with bladder overactivity, anticholinergic therapy can improve bladder function. In patients with poor bladder emptying, α-blockers can be used to reduce the post-void residual [1359,1360]. Chronic kidney disease develops in up to 65% of PUV patients and about 20% of these progress towards ESRD [1361]. Renal transplantation in these patients can be performed safely and effectively [1362,1363]. Deterioration of the graft function is mainly related to lower urinary tract dysfunction (LUTD) [1362]. An assessment and treatment algorithm is provided in Figure 13. There is limited data pertaining to sexual function and fertility in patients with PUV. Long-term studies have demonstrated normal erectile function and fertility potential [1364,1365]. However, a negative influence of the individual patient’s fertility has to be taken into account as these patients have a higher risk for bilateral cryptorchidism, recurrent epididymitis and ESRD [1364]. Figure 13: An algorithm on the assessment, management and follow-up of newborns with possible PUVCIC = clean intermittent catheterisation; OAB = overactive bladder; PUV = posterior urethral valve; RF = renal function; UT = urinary tract; UUT = upper urinary tract; VCUG = voiding cystourethrogram. Anterior urethral valve (AUV) Anterior urethral valve is a semilunar or iris-like band of tissue on ventral aspect of urethra. It can be isolated, or seen in association with anterior urethral diverticulum. The aetiology of isolated AUV is speculated to be secondary to congenital urethral obstruction, malunion of glanular and penile urethra, congenital cystic dilatation of periurethral glands or ruptured distal lip of a syringocele [1366]. It can be present in the bulbous urethra, the penoscrotal junction and penile urethra. Patients may present with poor urinary stream, penile ballooning, UTI or haematuria. Anterior urethral valves were classified by Firlit depending on the presence of diverticulum and dilatation of urethra and upper tract [1367]. The diagnosis is based on a VCUG with possible findings of dilated or elongated posterior urethra, dilatation of the anterior urethra, thickened trabeculated bladder, hypertrophied bladder neck, VUR, and urethral diverticula. In doubtful cases retrograde urethrography may be helpful showing linear filling defect along the ventral wall, or it may show a dilated urethra ending in a smooth bulge or an abrupt change in the calibre of the dilated urethra on VCUG [1368]. Treatment is mainly by endoscopic valve ablation. In selected patients, temporary diversion may be considered until the child is big enough for endoscopy. Open surgery is reserved for patients with very large diverticulum and defective spongiosum. Renal failure may develop in 22%, the risk being highest in patients with pre-treatment azotaemia, VUR and UTI [1369]. Anterior urethral diverticulum (AUD) Common postnatal presenting features of AUD are compressible ventral penile swelling, urinary postmicturition dribble, voiding difficulty, poor stream, and recurrent UTIs [1370-1372]. Diagnosis is by VCUG with or without a retrograde urethrogram. In small AUD, endoscopic cutting or deroofing of distal lip of the diverticulum can be sufficient treatment. Larger diverticulum requires excision with subsequent two layered urethroplasty; or marsupialisation with staged urethroplasty. In cases of urosepsis and obstructive uropathy, a suprapubic catheter or temporary urinary diversion (vesicostomy or proximal cutaneous urethrostomy) may be indicated prior to definitive surgical management [1373,1374]. Anatomically, AUVs have normal corpus spongiosum development whereas AUDs do not [1374]. Syringocele Cowper’s glands are two bulbourethral glands that are located within the urogenital diaphragm which open into the urethra 1-2 cm distal to the sphincter. Syringocele is the cystic dilatation of these glands. The aetiology can be congenital or acquired (trauma or infection). It has been classified as simple, imperforate, perforate and ruptured [1375]. A simpler grouping is suggested as to merge simple, perforate and ruptured ones into “open syringocele” and imperforate to “closed syringocele”. Closed syringoceles cause obstructive symptoms and open ones act as a diverticulae and cause post-voiding drippling and sometimes obstruction [1376]. Depending on the syringocele type, patients can present with post-void dribbling, urethral discharge, UTI, perineal pain, haematuria, obstructive voiding symptoms, dysuria or retention. Diagnosis is based on antegrade and/or retrograde urethrogram which shows a cystic defect distal to prostate. If such studies are inconclusive, US and/or MRI may be used. Asymptomatic syringoceles can be managed conservatively. Endoscopic deroofing with various energy sources (cold knife, electrocautery and holmium laser) in both obstructing and non-obstructing syringoceles is an effective method of marsupialisation [1377]. In cases where endoscopic approach is not feasible open correction may be considered. Cobb’s collar Cobb’s collar is a congenital membranous stricture of the bulbar urethra. It is different from congenital obstructive posterior urethral membrane (COPUM), is independent of the veru montanum and external sphincter and is believed to represent a persistence of part of the urogenital membrane [1378]. Voiding cystourethrogram shows narrowing in the proximal bulbar urethra with folds extending proximally, a dilated posterior urethra, prominent bladder neck and other findings of infravesical obstruction. Treatment with endoscopic cold-knife incision showed lower recurrence rates than electrocautery [1379]. Urethral atresia/hypoplasia Male urethral atresia is congenital, complete obstruction of the urethra caused by a membrane that is usually located at the distal end of the prostatic urethra. The urethra distal to this point is usually hypoplastic, presumably from lack of fetal voiding [1380]. Urethral atresia is associated with bladder distention, VUR, hydronephrosis and renal dysplasia [1381]. Most cases reported have the phenotypic characteristics of the prune belly syndrome. Antenatal intervention may be beneficial in terms of fetal survival [1382]. Although progressive augmentation by dilating the urethra anterior (PADUA) procedure was described as a treatment modality, the majority of cases require some form of supra-vesical diversion [1380,1381]. Posterior Urethral Polyps (PUP) Although, PUP does not cause antenatal hydronephrosis, it could cause obstruction later on in life. Posterior Urethral Polyps is a polypoid, pedunculated, fibroepithelial lesion arising in the posterior urethra proximal to the veru montanum. It lies on the floor of the urethra with its tip reaching into the bladder neck and obstruction occurs because of distal displacement of the polyp during micturition [1383]. Patients complain of dysuria, haematuria and obstructive symptoms such as poor urinary stream, intermittent retention episodes. Diagnosis can be suspected by VCUG and/or US but is confirmed during cystourethroscopy. Treatment is usually by endoscopic resection of the polyp. The course of the disease is benign and no recurrences have been reported in the literature [1384,1385]. 