3.13.4.3. Management of faecal incontinence. Children with neurogenic bladder usually have also a neurogenic bowel function. Faecal incontinence may have an even greater impact on QoL, as the odour can be a reason for social isolation. The aim of each treatment is to obtain a smooth, regular bowel emptying and to achieve continence and impendence. The regime should be tailored to the patient’s need, which may change over time. Beside a diet with small portioned fibre food and adequate fluid intake to keep a good fluid balance [733], follow-up options should be offered to the patients and caregivers. In the beginning, faecal incontinence is managed most commonly with mild laxatives, such as mineral oil, combined with enemas to facilitate removal of bowel contents. To enable the child to defecate once a day at a given time, rectal suppositories as well as digital stimulation by parents or caregivers can be used. Today, transanal irrigation is one of the most important treatments for patients with neurogenic bowel incontinence. Regular irrigations significantly reduce the risk for faecal incontinence also in the long run in up to 90% of the patients [787]. The risk of irrigation induced perforation of the bowel is estimated as one per 50,000 [678]. During childhood, most children depend on the help of the caregivers. Later in some patients, transanal irrigation becomes difficult or impossible due to anatomic or social circumstances. In these patients antegrade irrigation using a MACE-stoma (Malone Antegrade Continence Enema) is an option, which can also be placed in the left abdomen [788,789]. In a long-term study of 105 patients with a MACE stoma, 69% had successful bowel management. They were started on normal saline, but some switched to GoLYTELY (PEG-3350 and electrolyte solution). Additives (biscodyl, glycerin etc.) were needed in 34% of patients. Stomal complications occurred in 63% (infection, leakage, and stenosis) of patients, 33% required surgical revision and 6% eventually required diverting ostomies [790]. In addition, patients need to be informed, that the antegrade irrigation is also time consuming taking at least 20-60 minutes. 