5.13. Second resection (second TURB). 5.13.1. Detection of residual disease and tumour upstaging The significant risk of residual tumour after initial TURB of TaT1 lesions has been demonstrated [144]. This residual cancer has the potential to worsen oncological outcomes and therefore further emphasises the importance of an effective initial TURB. As patients with an initial incomplete TURB (either from extensive tumour or intra-operative complications) will require a second completion resection, documentation of resection completeness at the time of the initial TURB is essential. The main purposes of a second TURB are to: (1) clear any residual cancer; (2) re-resect the previous resection site to establish correct pathological staging; and (3) obtain any missing elements of the clinical information (e.g. extent of cancer, involvement of prostatic urethra). A systematic review analysing data of 8,409 patients with Ta or T1 HG UC demonstrated a 51% risk of persistence and an 8% risk of under-staging in T1 tumours. The analysis also showed a high risk of residual disease in Ta tumours, but this observation was based only on a limited number of cases. Most of the residual lesions were detected at the original tumour location [203]. Another systematic review and meta-analysis of 3,556 patients with T1 tumours showed that the prevalence rate of residual tumours and upstaging to invasive disease after TURB remained high even in a subgroup with detrusor muscle sampled at the initial TURB. In the subgroup of 1,565 T1 tumours with detrusor muscle present, persistent tumour was found in 58% and under-staging occurred in 11% of cases [204]. Prospective trials suggest that post-operative positive urine cytology [205] and Xpert Bladder® (urine mRNA test) [206] are independently associated with residual disease at second resection and risk of future recurrences, respectively. These data, however, need to be confirmed in further studies. 5.13.2. The impact of second resection on treatment outcomes A second TURB can increase recurrence-free survival (RFS) [207-209], improve outcomes after BCG treatment [210] and provide prognostic information [211-214]. In a retrospective evaluation of a large multi-institutional cohort of 2,451 patients with BCG-treated T1 G3/HG tumours (a second resection was performed in 935 patients), the second resection improved RFS, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) only in patients without detrusor muscle in the initial resection specimen [215]. In a retrospective analysis of 7,666 patients diagnosed with T1 cancer in Ontario, 2,162 underwent a second resection; after adjusting for the effects of confounding variables, only OS (and not CSS) was better in patients who underwent second resection [167]. This apparent improved survival could also be the result of selection bias with fitter patients undergoing second resections. Whilst a single centre retrospective review revealed survival benefit in 209 HGTa patients who underwent a second TURB [216], further evidence is required to identify specific sub-groups of patients with high-grade cancer who are most likely to benefit from a second resection. 5.13.3. Timing of second resection Retrospective evaluation showed that a second resection performed 14–42 days after initial resection provides longer RFS and PFS compared to second resection performed after 43–90 days [217]. Based on this currently available evidence, a second TURB is recommended in selected cases 2 to 6 weeks after initial resection [217] (for recommendations on patient selection, see Section 5.14). 5.13.4. Recording of results The results of the second resection (residual tumours and under-staging) reflect the quality and effectiveness of the initial TURB. As the goal is to improve the quality of the initial TURB, the results of the second resection should be recorded. 