7.4. Disease management. Treatment of LSD should be tailored according to the underlying aetiology. 7.4.1. Psychological intervention Data on the efficacy of psychological interventions for LSD are scarce. Accordingly, recommendations must be interpreted with caution. Psychological interventions with a focus on cognitive and behavioural strategies may be beneficial for LSD in men [336,834] (Figure 9). Mindfulness treatments may be a strong candidate, as well [834]. Since both members of a couple may experience age-related changes concurrently and interdependently, it could be helpful to address the sexual health needs of the ageing couple (including LSD) as a whole rather than treating the individual patient [835]. Indeed, psychologists are putting more emphasis on the concept of sexual desire discrepancy. Sexual desire discrepancy is often found in couples or partners, and mirror a natural part of life and partners’ dynamics. Clinical approaches based on this lens are less stigmatising as they consider the normal variations in sexual desire that occur throughout the lifespan. This intervention option targets couples distressed by sexual desire discrepancies rather than a single individual targeted as the one presenting low sexual desire [826]. Figure 9: Flow-diagram of psychological evaluation of patients with low sexual desire 7.4.2. Pharmacotherapy Low sexual desire secondary to low testosterone levels can be treated with different formulations of testosterone. The favourable effect of testosterone therapy on sexual motivation and the presence of sexual thoughts was shown in a meta-analysis [832]. The aim of treatment should be to reach the physiological range of testosterone (see Section 3.3). Hyperprolactinaemia can also cause LSD and one of the most relevant aetiological factors is prolactin-secreting pituitary adenomas. These adenomas can be easily diagnosed with an MRI of the pituitary gland and can be treated with dopamine agonist agents [836]. The other accompanying endocrine disorders, such as hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism and diabetes, should be treated accordingly. Pharmacotherapy can also be used to treat major depression; however, it should be remembered that antidepressants may negatively affect sexual functioning; therefore, antidepressant compounds with less effect on sexual function should be chosen. Psychotherapy can increase the efficacy of pharmacotherapy, especially for patients whose LSD is due to depression [837]. 