10.1.3.1. Medical Management – first-line treatment. First-line medical treatments for ischaemic priapism of more than 4 hours duration are strongly recommended before any surgical treatment. Conversely, first-line treatments initiated beyond 48 hours, while relieving priapism, have little documented benefit in terms of long-term erectile function preservation. This is likely to be the consequence of irreversible smooth muscle hypoxia and damage that begins to be established by approximately 48 hours of the onset of ischaemia [1340-1342]. It has been shown in a series of 50 patients with low-flow priapism who were successfully treated and followed-up for a mean of 66 months, that those with priapism lasting for more than 48 hours had a significant risk of ED [1340]. Historically, several first-line treatments have been described including exercise, ejaculation, ice packs, cold baths, and cold water enemas [1336]. However, there is limited evidence for the benefit of these measures and they may even exacerbate the condition in SCD patients. Success rates for these conservative measures alone have rarely been reported. In a small series, cold water enemas have been reported to induce detumescence in six out of ten cases [1367]. In another study 24.5% of 122 patients achieved detumescence following priapic episodes lasting for more than 6 hours by cooling of the penis and perineum, and walking upstairs [1368]. 10.1.3.1.1. Penile anaesthesia/analgesia Blood aspiration and intracavernous injection of a sympathomimetic agent can be performed without any anaesthesia; however, anaesthesia may be necessary when there is severe penile pain. Whilst anaesthesia may not alleviate the ischaemic pain, cutaneous anaesthesia facilitates subsequent therapies. The treatment options for penile anaesthesia/systemic analgesia include: dorsal nerve block;circumferential penile block;subcutaneous local penile shaft block;oral conscious sedation (for paediatric patients). 10.1.3.1.2. Aspiration ± irrigation with 0.9% w/v saline solution The first intervention for an episode of priapism lasting more than 4 hours consists of corporal blood aspiration to drain the stagnant blood from the corporal bodies, making it possible to relieve the compartment-syndrome-like condition within the corpus cavernosum. Blood aspiration may be performed with intracorporeal access either through the glans or via percutaneous needle access to the lateral aspect of the proximal penile shaft, using a 16 or 18 G angio-catheter or butterfly needle. The needle must penetrate the skin, the subcutaneous tissue and the tunica albuginea to drain blood from the corpus cavernosum. Some clinicians advocate using two angiocatheters or butterfly needles at the same time to accelerate drainage, as well as aspirating and irrigating simultaneously with a saline solution [1368]. Aspiration should be continued until bright red, oxygenated blood is aspirated. Several case series have reported outcomes for first-line treatments; however, in most cases, aspiration and irrigation were combined with intracavernosal injection of sympathomimetic agents [1334], thus making it difficult to draw conclude the success rate of aspiration + irrigation alone [1334]. Overall, case series and retrospective studies reported a success rate ranging from 0 to 100% of cases [1334]. In an RCT, 70 patients with ischaemic priapism lasting more than 6 hours secondary to intracavernosal injection were treated with aspiration plus saline irrigation at different temperatures [1368]. The study reported an 85% success rate with the optimum results achieved using a 10°C saline infusion after blood aspiration. There is insufficient data to determine whether aspiration followed by saline intracorporeal irrigation is more effective than aspiration alone. 10.1.3.1.3. Aspiration ± irrigation with 0.9% w/v saline solution in combination with intracavernous injection of pharmacological agents. This combination is currently considered the standard of care for the treatment of ischaemic priapism [1336,1369,1370]. Pharmacological agents include sympathomimetic drugs or α-adrenergic agonists. Intracavernous sympathomimetic agents include phenylephrine, etilephrine, ephedrine, epinephrine, norepinephrine and metaraminol with a resolution rate of up to 80% [1336,1369,1371-1378]. The use of intracavernous adrenaline injection alone has also been sporadically reported [1379]. It has been reported that the use of a sympathomimetic agent combined with prior intracavernosal aspiration or irrigation had a resolution ranging from 80 to 100% of cases as compared with 58% in those who had a sympathomimetic injection alone [1334,1370]. The potential treatment-related adverse effects of intracavernous phenylephrine (and other sympathomimetic agents) include headache, dizziness, hypertension, reflex bradycardia, tachycardia and palpitations and sporadic subarachnoid haemorrhage [347]. Monitoring of blood pressure and pulse should be performed during intracavernous administration of sympathomimetic agents. As intracavernous sympathomimetic agents can cause hypertension, the Guidelines Panel is of the opinion that these agents are contraindicated in patients with malignant or poorly controlled hypertension, as there are case reports of significant cardiovascular and neurological complications following the use of these pharmacological agents for priapism [1372,1380,1381]. Similarly, data suggest that sympathomimetic agents cause a hypertensive crisis when given with monoamine oxidase inhibitors, hence these medications should not be used together [1382]. 10.1.3.1.4. Intracavernosal and oral pharmacological agents Pharmacological agents for the treatment of priapism are discussed in more detail in the following section. Table 38 summarises dosing and administration of these agents. Phenylephrine Phenylephrine is a selective α-1-adrenergic receptor agonist that has been observed in small case series to be effective at producing detumescence in priapism, when given as an intracavernosal injection, with few adverse effects [1377,1383]. Phenylephrine is the recommended adrenergic agonist drug of choice due to its high selectivity for the α-1-adrenergic receptor, without concomitant β-mediated inotropic and chronotropic cardiac effects [1371,1375,1376]. Phenylephrine has potential cardiovascular adverse effects [1336,1369,1371,1372,1375,1376] and it is recommended that blood pressure and pulse are monitored every fifteen minutes for one hour after injection. This is particularly important in older men with pre-existing cardiovascular diseases. After injection, the puncture site should be compressed and the corpus cavernosum massaged to facilitate drug distribution. Etilephrine Etilephrine is also an adrenergic agonist that directly stimulates both a and β adrenergic receptors [1370]. Most of the literature describing the use of etilephrine for treatment of priapism is related to men with SCD but there are small retrospective case series that have reported its benefits for priapism secondary to iatrogenic causes [1384,1385]. Etilephrine is the second most widely used sympathomimetic agent [1372]. Methylene blue Methylene blue is a guanylate cyclase inhibitor, that may be a potential inhibitor of endothelial-mediated cavernous smooth muscle relaxation. Small retrospective case series have reported its successful use for treating short-term pharmacologically-induced priapism [1386,1387]. Treatment-related adverse effects include a transient burning sensation and blue discolouration of the penis. Adrenaline Adrenaline produces both a-adrenergic receptor agonist and β-adrenergic receptor activity. Intracavernosal adrenaline has been used in patients with ischaemic priapism due to an intracavernous injection of vasoactive agents. The limited literature [1379,1388] suggests that adrenaline can achieve detumescence in short-term priapism, with one small case series reporting a success rate of over 50% after a single injection, with an overall success rate of 95% with repeated injections [1379,1388]. β-2-agonists Oral terbutaline is a β-2-agonist with minor β-1 effects and some α-agonist activity; although its mechanism of action is not yet fully understood [1389-1391]. The main use of terbutaline is for prevention of recurrent episodes of prolonged erection. Oral treatment with terbutaline was tested in three placebo-controlled RCTs [1390-1392] showing a success rate of 30 to 60% in patients with ischemic priapism associated with intracavernous injection of erectogenic agents. Terbutaline should be given cautiously in patients with coronary artery disease, increased intravascular fluid volume, oedema or hypokalaemia [1391]. In a single multi-centre prospective study, another β-2-agonist, salbutamol, has been reported to induce detumescence in 34% of cases of prolonged erection (more than three hours) after intracavernous injection of erectogenic agents [1393]. However, more robust data are needed to recommend oral salbutamol for the treatment of ischaemic priapism. Table 38: Medical treatment of ischaemic priapism DrugDose/Instructions for usePhenylephrineIntracavernous injection of 200 μg every 3-5 minutes.Maximum dosage is 1 mg within 1 hour.Lower doses are recommended in children and patients with severe cardiovascular diseases.EtilephrineIntracavernosal injection at a concentration of 2.5 mg in 1-2 mL normal saline.Methylene blueIntracavernous injection of 50-100 mg, left for 5 minutes. It is then aspirated and the penis is compressed for an additional 5 minutes.AdrenalineIntracavernous injection of 2 mL of 1/100,000 adrenaline solution up to five times over 20 minutes.TerbutalineOral administration of 5 mg for priapism lasting more than 2.5 hours, after intracavernous injection of vasoactive agents. 10.1.3.1.5. Management of priapism related to sickle cell disease The results of a systematic review on the overall management of priapism related to SCD found that few studies were conducted exclusively on patients with SCD and studies on mixed populations usually did not report separate data on SCD patients [1335]. Clear and systematic reporting of patient characteristics, interventions and outcomes was lacking, and the length of follow-up, if reported, varied significantly among the studies. Overall, the quality of studies was deemed poor to allow high-quality, evidence-based recommendations to be made. Urgent intervention is essential and the general approach is similar to that described for other cases of ischaemic priapism and should be co-ordinated with a haematologist [1394-1396]. However, as with other haematological disorders, other therapeutic interventions may also need to be implemented [1394,1396,1397]. Specific measures for SCD-related priapism include intravenous hydration and narcotic analgesia while preparing the patient for aspiration and irrigation. Additionally, supplemental oxygen administration and alkalinisation with bicarbonate can be helpful [1395]. Haemoglobin S (HbS) percentage should be measured in all SCD patients with acute priapism. Exchange blood transfusion has also been proposed, with the aim of increasing tissue delivery of oxygen [1398]. The transfused blood should be sickle cell haemoglobin negative and Rh and Kell antigen matched [1399]; however, the evidence is inconclusive as to whether exchange transfusion itself helps to resolve priapism. A systematic review reported that the mean time to detumescence was eleven days with exchange transfusions compared to eight days with conventional treatment. Moreover, there were nine cases of ASPEN syndrome (association of SCD, priapism, exchange transfusion and neurological events) as a consequence of blood transfusion [1400]. A series of ten patients with SCD-related priapism showed that it was safe to perform exchange transfusion [1398]; however, several reports suggest that exchange transfusion may result in serious neurological sequelae [1400]. Therefore, routine use of exchange transfusion is not recommended as a primary treatment intervention in this group unless there is a risk of SCD-related symptoms. However, in patients who failed medical management, transfusion may be required to enable general anaesthesia to be safely administered prior to definitive surgery [1401]. 