3.2.5.6. Chronic pelvic pain and prolapse/Incontinence mesh. Continence and prolapse mesh implants were developed as simple flexible polypropylene plastic acting as a scaffold to treat stress urinary incontinence (SUI) and uterovaginal prolapse, respectively. They were deemed easy to insert, but no credence was given as to how safe they were, whether they could be removed should they cause complications, or what to do should they not be effective [161,162]. Most meshes took less than an hour to implant surgically and most patients were treated as day cases, allowing women to leave hospital quickly and get on with their lives. Therefore, rather than undergo complex traditional surgery, women were offered permanent mesh implants, particularly in the treatment of SUI where they were considered to be the gold standard [163,164]. However, over the last few years the insertion of mesh has come with significant ‘health and safety warnings’ [165,166]. For many, mesh was initially seen not just as an effective treatment but as a permanent one. Complications were not thought to be a significant issue and the figure of 1-3% was often quoted. However, we now know the complication rate was closer to 10% [167]. They included chronic pain [168,169], as well as chronic infections [170], erosion into the surrounding organs including the vagina, urethra and bladder, as well as nerve and musculoskeletal damage affecting mobility [168,169,171,172]. All had a significant impact on the patients’ QoL. It is as a result of severely debilitating complications following mesh implantation [168], that the field of mesh removal medicine and surgery emerged [173]. Early recognition of possible mesh complications is very important. It is normal to wake up in some degree of discomfort after any surgery. However, if the pain after the operation is very severe and much more than expected after this type of surgery, it can be a sign that there was added trauma to the surrounding organs during the procedure. Most pain is often managed with analgesia, but some women might not fully respond to therapy. If the pain is difficult to treat and does not improve over time, it may become necessary to remove the mesh. Leaving a painful mesh in the pelvis, can lead to chronic pelvic pain. The precise mechanism is unknown but it is thought to be a ‘neuro-inflammatory’ process [174], as has been proposed in hernia mesh neuralgia. The impact of the mesh, regardless of site, appears to be similar. 