3.2.5.8. Associated conditions in pelvic pain syndromes. Nerve damage Spinal pathology and any pathology along the course of the nerve involved may result in neuropathic pain in the distribution of these nerves. Neoplastic disease, infection, trauma, surgical incisions and post-operative scarring may result in nerve injury [186]. Pudendal neuralgia is the most often mentioned form of nerve damage in the literature. Anatomical variations may pre-dispose the patient to developing pudendal neuralgia over time or with repeated low-grade trauma (such as sitting for prolonged periods of time or cycling) [187,188]. The pudendal nerve may be damaged at the level of: The piriformis muscle. For example, as part of a piriformis syndrome: in some cases, the nerve may pass through the muscle and hence be trapped; or in other cases, muscle hypertrophy or spasm is implicated.The sacrospinal/sacrotuberous ligaments, possibly accounting for 42% of cases.Within Alcock’s canal (medial to the obturator internus muscle, within the fascia of the muscle), possibly accounting for 26% of cases.Multiple levels in 17% of cases.The site of injury determines the location of perceived pain and the nature of associated symptoms (e.g., the more distal the damage, the less likely the anal region will be involved). The clinical presentation depends on different factors. There is a wide age range, as one would expect, with a condition that has so many potential causes. It is suggested that, the younger the patient, the better the prognosis. Essentially, the sooner the diagnosis is made, as with any compression nerve injury, the better the prognosis, and older patients may have a more protracted problem [189]. Six out of ten cases are observed in women. Some special situations can be listed: In orthopaedic hip surgery, pressure from the positioning of the patient, where the perineum is placed hard against the brace, can result in pudendal nerve damage [190,191]. The surgery itself may also directly damage the nerve. Pelvic surgery such as sacrospinous fixation is clearly associated with pudendal nerve damage in some cases [192,193]. In many types of surgery, including colorectal, urological and gynaecological, pudendal nerve injury may be implicated.Fractures of the sacrum or pelvis may result in pudendal nerve/root damage and pain. Falls and trauma to the gluteal region may also produce pudendal nerve damage if associated with significant tissue injury or prolonged pressure.Tumours in the pre-sacral space must be considered. Tumours invading the pudendal nerve may occur and there may also be damage from surgery for pelvic cancer [194].The pudendal neuralgia of birth trauma is thought to resolve in most cases over a period of months. However, rarely, it appears to continue as painful neuropathy. Multiple pregnancies and births may predispose to stretch neuropathy in later life. This is more difficult to be certain about [195].Child birth and repeated abdominal straining associated with chronic constipation [196] are thought to pre-dispose elderly women to post-menopausal pelvic floor descent and stretching of the pudendal nerve with associated pain. Changes in the hormone status may also be a factor. In Urogenital Pain Management Centres, the commonest associations with pudendal neuralgia appear to be: history of pelvic surgery; prolonged sitting; and post-menopausal older women. Sexual dysfunction Chronic pelvic pain is a clinical condition that results from complex interactions of physiological and psychological factors and has a direct impact on the social, personal and professional lives of men and women. Men Chronic pain as well as its treatment can impair our ability to express sexuality. In an England study, 73% of patients with any chronic pain had some degree of sexual problems as a result of the pain [117]. These problems can occur because of several factors. Psychological factors like pain catastrophising, a decrease in self-esteem, depression and anxiety can contribute to the problem severity [197]. Physiological factors like fatigue, nausea and pain itself can cause sexual dysfunction. Pain medications (opioids, and the selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors [SSRIs]) can also decrease libido [198] and delay ejaculation. The number of studies on the effects of CPPPS on sexual function is limited. Sexual dysfunction is often ignored because of a lack of standardised measurements. At present, the most commonly used tool is the IIEF questionnaire [110]. The presence of pelvic pain may increase the risk for ED independent of age [199]. On the other hand, cross-sectional data suggest no improvement of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) by an increased frequency of ejaculation [200]. Although mental distress and impaired QoL related to illness could contribute to sexual dysfunction observed in patients with PPPS, the presence of erectile and ejaculatory disorders is more frequently related to symptoms suggestive of a more severe inflammatory condition [112]. These arguments are important for the understanding of the close relationship between CPPPS symptoms, disturbed sexuality, impact on QoL, and psychological implications including depression and more failure anticipation thoughts [104-106,200-202]. Sexual dysfunction heightens anger, frustration and depression, all of which place a strain on the patients’ relationships. The female partners of men with sexual dysfunction and depression often present with similar symptoms including pain upon intercourse and depressive symptoms. Men with CPPPS have reported a high frequency of sexual relationship dissolution and psychological symptoms, such as depression and suicidal thinking [104,203]. On the other hand, it was found that men with PPPS did not report significantly decreased sexual satisfaction compared to controls [204]. There is consensus that therapeutic strategies reducing symptoms of pelvic pain are of relevance in relation to changes in sexual function. Also intimacy and having sex can yield positive experiences that will reduce the pain. The CNS plays an important role in this mechanism. Women Chronic pelvic pain leads to substantial impairment in QoL and several sexual dysfunctions [205]. It seems reasonable to expect that pain, extreme fatigue, depressive mood and pain drugs will affect women’s sexuality. Women with CPPPS reported significantly more pain, depression, and anxiety symptoms and were physically more impaired than women in the control group. In comparison with controls, women with CPPPS reported significantly more sexual avoidance behaviour, non-sensuality, and complaints of “vaginismus” [206]. Patients with CPPPS reported more sexual problems than women with any other type of chronic pain problem [207]. The quality of intimate relationships is closely connected with sexual function [208]. Satisfaction with sexual relationships appears to be associated with higher marital functioning [209]. In addition sexual dissatisfaction is related to sexual dysfunction. When one partner suffers from chronic pain, the ability of both partners to cope with the pain and the extent to which partners are supportive of the chronic pain sufferer have been found to be a predictor of sexual functioning [209]. Approximately two-thirds of patients in another study reported reduced frequency in their sexual relations as a result of CPPPS [210]. One study demonstrated that CPPPS patients reported worse sexual function with regard to desire, arousal, lubrication, orgasm, satisfaction, and more frequent and severe pain with vaginal penetration than women without CPPPS [211]. In an interview with 50 chronic pain sufferers and their spouses, 78% of the pain sufferers and 84% of partners described deterioration, including cessation of their sex life [212]. In a study in patients with back pain, half reported decreased frequency of sex since the onset of chronic pain [117]. The Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) has been developed as a brief, multi-dimensional self-report instrument for assessing the key dimensions of sexual function in women, which includes desire, subjective arousal, lubrication, orgasm, satisfaction, and pain. Using the FSFI, women with CPPPS reported worse sexual function in all subscales and total score than women without CPPPS. The largest differences between women with CPPPS and without CPPPS, were seen for the domains of pain and arousal. The total score and the subscales of the FSFI had high levels of internal consistency and test-retest reliability when assessed in a sample of women with CPPPS. The FSFI also showed good ability to discriminate between women with and without CPPPS [211]. Myofascial pain Myalgia is too often overlooked as a form of chronic pelvic pain. The pelvic floor and adjacent muscles are used in an abnormal way. Studies in the field of chronic prostatitis support the idea that patients with CPPPS have more muscle spasm and increased muscle tone and report pain when the pelvic floor muscles are palpated [213]. Learning pelvic floor muscle relaxation can diminish spasm and pain [214]. Repeated or chronic muscular overload can activate trigger points in the pelvic floor muscles. A report from the Chronic Prostatitis Cohort Study showed that 51% of patients with prostatitis and only 7% of controls had any muscle tenderness. Tenderness in the pelvic floor muscles was only found in the CPPPS group [122]. The first ideas about the neurological aspects of the pelvic floor muscles in relation to chronic pelvic pain were published in 1999. The possibility of CNS changes in the regulation of pelvic floor function was suggested as a mechanism for development of CPPPS. Of the patients presenting with pelvic pain, 88% had poor to absent pelvic floor muscle function [121]. Animal studies on the role of neurogenic inflammation have also elucidated some important phenomena. Irritation of the prostate, bladder and pelvic floor muscles results in expression of C-fos-positive cells in the CNS. There appears to be convergence of afferent information onto central pathways. Once the central changes have become established, they become independent of the peripheral input that initiated them [215]. Repeated or chronic muscular overload can activate trigger points in the muscle. Trigger points are defined as hyper-irritable spots within a taut band. Other criteria for trigger points are recognition of the pain as ‘familiar’, and pain on stretching the muscle. Apart from pain, trigger points prevent full lengthening of the muscle, thereby restricting the range of movement. Pain as a result of these trigger points is aggravated by specific movements and alleviated by certain positions. Positions and movements in which the shortened muscle is stretched are painful. Patients know which activities and postures influence pain. Trigger points can be located within the pelvic floor muscles and in adjacent muscles such as the abdominal, gluteal and iliopsoas muscles. Pain is aggravated by pressure on the trigger point (e.g., pain related to sexual intercourse). Pain also worsens after sustained or repeated contractions of pelvic floor muscles (e.g., pain related to voiding or defecation). 