3.4. Histological diagnosis. Renal cell carcinomas and other renal tumours comprise a broad spectrum of histopathological entities described in the 5th edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of urogenital tumours published in 2022 [22-24]. The 5th edition presents standard morphologic diagnostic criteria, combined with immunohistochemistry and relevant molecular tests was significantly revised as compared to the 2016 classification [25]. The global application of next-generation sequencing (NGS) will result in a diagnostic shift from morphology to molecular analyses. Therefore, a molecular-driven renal tumour classification has been introduced in addition to morphology-based renal tumours (Table 3.1). Examples of molecularly-defined epithelial renal tumours include SMARCB1-deficient renal medullary carcinoma, TFE3- and TFEB-rearranged RCC, ALK-rearranged RCC, and elongin C (ELOC)-mutated RCC. The most profound changes in the 2022 WHO classification mainly relate to rare kidney tumours. There are three main RCC types: clear cell (ccRCC), papillary (pRCC no longer divided into type I and II) and chRCC. The RCC type classification has been confirmed by cytogenetic and genetic analyses [25,26] (LE: 2b). The 5-year overall survival (OS) for non-metastatic (including N0-N1) chromophobe, papillary, clear-cell and collecting duct RCC is 91%, 82%, 81% and 44%, respectively [27]. Sarcomatoid RCC is not a specific subtype, but essentially represents a pattern of de-differentiation associated with adverse outcome and poor cancer-specific survival (CSS), irrespective of the underlying RCC subtype; it should be graded as WHO/ISUP (International Society of Urological Pathology) grade IV. Multilocular cystic renal neoplasm of low malignant potential is a new subtype of cRCC in the 2022 classification. A new group “oncocytic and chromophobe tumours” encompass oncocytoma together with chRCC and other oncocytic tumours. Other oncocytic tumours include tumours that do not strictly fit into either the oncocytoma or chRCC subtypes [22,28]. Histological diagnosis includes, besides RCC type; evaluation of ISUP nuclear grade, sarcomatoid features, vascular invasion, tumour necrosis, and invasion of the collecting system and peri-renal fat, pT, or even pN categories. The four-tiered WHO/ISUP grading system has replaced the Fuhrman grading system [22,25]. Table 3.1 World Health Organization classification of renal tumours 2022  WHO classification of renal tumours 20221. Renal Cell Tumours01.I Clear cell renal tumoursClear cell RCCMultilocular cystic renal neoplasm of low malignant potential01.II Papillary renal tumoursPapillary adenomaPapillary RCC01.III Oncocytic and chromophobe renal tumoursOncocytoma of the kidneyChromophobe RCCOther oncocytic tumours of the kidney01.IV Collecting duct tumoursCollecting duct carcinoma01.V Other renal tumoursClear cell papillary renal cell tumourMucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinomaTubulocystic RCCAcquired cystic disease-associated RCCEosinophilic solid and cystic (ESC) RCCRCC NOS (Not Otherwise Specified)01.VI Molecularly defined renal tumoursTFE3-rearranged RCCsTFEB-altered RCC (TFEB-rearranged RCC and TFEB amplified RCC)ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCCFumarate hydratase-deficient RCCSuccinate dehydrogenase-deficient RCCALK-rearranged RCCsSMARCB1-deficient renal medullary carcinoma2. Metanephric tumoursMetanephric adenomaMetanephric adenofibromaMetanephric stromal tumour3. Mixed epithelial and stromal tumour familyMixed epithelial and stromal tumourAdult cystic nephroma4. Renal mesenchymal tumours04.I Adult renal mesenchymal tumoursClassic angiomyolipoma/PEComa of the kidneyEpitheloid angiomyolipoma/epithelioid PEComa of the kidneyRenal haemangioblastomaJuxtaglomerular cell tumourRenomedullary interstitial cell tumour04.II Paediatric renal mesenchymal tumoursOssifying renal tumour of infancyCongenial mesoblastic nephromaRhabdoid tumour of kidneyClear cell sarcoma of kidney5. Embryonal neoplasms of the kidneyNephroblastic tumoursNephrogenic restsPediatric cystic nephromaCystic partially differentiated nephroblastomaNephroblastoma6. Miscellaneous tumoursGerm cell tumours of the kidney 3.4.1. Clear-cell RCC Overall, ccRCC representing about 70% of RCC [23], is well circumscribed with a pseudocapsule. The cut surface is golden-yellow, often with haemorrhage and necrosis. Loss of chromosome 3p and mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene at chromosome 3p25 are frequently found. The loss of von Hippel-Lindau protein function contributes to tumour initiation, progression, and metastases. The 3p locus harbours additional ccRCC tumour suppressor genes (UTX, JARID1C, SETD2, PBRM1, BAP1) [22]. For details about prognosis, see Section 6.3. 3.4.1.1. Multilocular cystic renal neoplasm of low malignant potential (MCNLMP) Indolent, exclusively cystic, multiloculated renal tumour devoid of any expansile solid growth, with clear cells lining and low grade nuclei. Detection of small solid expansive nodules and tumour necrosis are incompatible with MCNLMP. It represents 0.5-2.5% of all renal tumours and is a benign lesion. There are no reports of progression, metastases or cancer-related death with long-term follow-up [22,23]. 3.4.2. Papillary RCC Papillary RCC (pRCC) is the second-most encountered morphotype of RCC accounting for 13-20% of renal epithelial tumours. It is usually circumscribed and characterised by papillary or tubulopapillary architecture, without specific features of other RCCs with papillary architecture [22,23]. Papillary RCC has traditionally been subdivided into two types; Type I and II pRCC [25]. However, in the new 2022 WHO classification, the former pRCC type I is now referred to as “pRCC of classic pattern”. Three additional morphologic patterns of pRCC have been introduced including: a) bi-phasic (alveolo-squamoid) pattern exhibiting mostly solid growth; b) papillary neoplasm with reverse nuclear polarity, previously described as “oncocytic low-grade pRCC”; and c) Warthin-like pRCC that exhibits brisk inflammation mimicking Warthin tumour of the salivary gland. Genetic changes of pRCC include trisomies and tetrasomies of chromosomes 7 and 17 and loss of Y-chromosome. Mesenchymal-epithelial Transition (MET) gene mutations are more frequent in low-grade pRCC. The typical histology of classical pattern pRCC, formally type I pRCC, (narrow papillae without any binding, and only microcapillaries in papillae) explains its typical clinical signs. Narrow papillae without any binding and a tough pseudo-capsule explain the ideal rounded shape (Pascal’s law) and fragility (specimens have a “minced meat” structure). Tumour growth causes necrotisation of papillae, which is a source of hyperosmotic proteins that cause subsequent “growth” of the tumour, fluid inside the tumour, and only a serpiginous, contrast-enhancing margin. Stagnation in the microcapillaries explains the minimal post-contrast attenuation on CT. Classical pattern pRCC can imitate a pathologically changed cyst (Bosniak IIF or III). The typical signs of classical pattern pRCC are an ochre colour, frequently exophytic, extra-renal growth and low grade. A risk of renal tumour biopsy tract seeding exists (12.5%), probably due to the fragility of the tumour papillae [29]. 3.4.3. Chromophobe RCC Chromophobe RCC is now grouped in “Oncocytic and chromophobe tumours”. Most chRCCs are discovered incidentally in asymptomatic patients [22,23]. Overall, chRCC presents as a pale tan, relatively homogenous and tough, well-demarcated mass without a capsule. Most tumours are sporadic. Rare hereditary forms include Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome with mutations in folliculin and Cowden syndrome with mutations in PTEN see Section 3.5.6 for further information [22,23]. Chromophobe RCC cannot be graded by the WHO/ISUP (formerly Fuhrman) grading system because of its innate nuclear atypia. An alternative grading system has been proposed, but has yet to be validated [22,23]. Loss of chromosomes-Y, 1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 17 and 21 are typical genetic changes [22,23]. The prognosis is relatively good, with high 5-year recurrence-free survival (RFS), and 10-year CSS. The five- and 10-year RFS rates were 94.3% and 89.2%, respectively. Recurrent disease developed in 5.7% of patients, and 76.5% presented with distant metastases with 54% of metastatic disease diagnoses involving a single organ, most commonly bone. Recurrence and death after surgically resected chRCC are rare. For completely excised lesions < pT2a without coagulative necrosis or sarcomatoid features, the prognosis is excellent [30]. 