4.5.4. Disease management. 4.5.4.1. Animal bites Local wound management depends on the extent of tissue destruction. Antibiotics should be prescribed in accordance with local resistance patterns [347-349]. The possibility of rabies infection must be considered, taking into account the geographical location, animal involved, specific nature of the wound and the type of attack (provoked/unprovoked). Elderly and immunosuppressed patients should be vaccinated with human rabies immunoglobulin and human diploid cell vaccine [350,351]. 4.5.4.2. Human bites In cases of human bites, apart from wound management, infection should be considered since transmission of viral diseases may occur, Hepatitis B vaccine/immunoglobulin and/or immunodeficiency virus (HIV) post-exposure prophylaxis should be offered. For further details, see Guidelines for the Management of Human Bite Injuries [352]. 4.5.4.3. Blunt penile trauma Blunt trauma to the flaccid penis does not usually cause tearing of the tunica. Subcutaneous haematoma after sexual intercourse, without associated rupture of the cavernosal tunica albuginea, does not require surgical intervention. In these cases, non-steroidal analgesics and ice-packs are recommended [353]. 4.5.4.4. Penile fracture The thickness of the tunica albuginea in the flaccid state (approximately 2 mm) decreases in erection to 0.25-0.5 mm and is therefore more vulnerable to traumatic injury [344,354]. When a penile fracture is diagnosed, surgical intervention with closure of the tunica albuginea is recommended; it ensures the lowest rate of negative long-term sequelae and has no negative effect on the psychological wellbeing of the patient [355]. The approach is usually through a circumferential incision proximal to the coronal sulcus which enables complete degloving of the penis. Increasingly, local longitudinal incisions centred on the area of fracture or ventral longitudinal approaches are currently used [265]. A recent systematic review on the management of penile fractures concluded that immediate repair should be within 24 hours of presentation [356]; however, delayed presentation should not prevent exploration [305]. Further localisation may be gained with a flexible cystoscopy performed prior to incision, if urethral trauma is suspected and eventually proven [240]. Surgical closure of the tunica should be carried out using absorbable sutures. 4.5.4.5. Penetrating penile trauma In penetrating penile trauma non-operative management is recommended for small superficial injuries with intact Buck’s fascia [310]. In more significant penetrating penile injuries, surgical exploration and debridement of necrotic tissue is recommended. Even in extended injuries of the penis, primary alignment of the disrupted tissues may allow for acceptable healing because of the robust penile blood supply [314]. The principles of care are debridement of devitalised tissue, with the preservation of as much viable tissues as possible, haemostasis, diversion of urine in selected cases and the removal of foreign bodies. Tissues of questionable viability may be left for subsequent definitive surgery. If a delayed repair is needed, depending on the type of injury and the extent of tissue damage, it usually takes place four to six weeks after the trauma has occurred. The surgical approach depends upon the site and extent of the injury, but a subcoronal incision with penile degloving usually gives good exposure. Initially, a defect in the tunica albuginea should be closed after copious irrigation. If there has been too much tissue loss, the defect can be repaired either immediately or after delay with a patch (either from an autologous saphenous vein or xenograft). The elasticity of genital skin means it is usually possible to manage the loss of a moderate amount of penile skin; however, management is more difficult in extensive injuries with significant skin loss. The tissue chosen for reconstruction following trauma needs to provide good coverage and must be suitable for reconstruction. Split-thickness skin grafting provides good coverage and a dependable take that is reproducible and durable. However, split-thickness grafts contract more than full-thickness grafts and their use on the penile shaft should be kept to a minimum. Skin grafts with thickness of at least 0.4 mm should be used in order to reduce the risk of contraction [314]. Full-thickness skin grafting onto the penile shaft gives less contracture, a better cosmetic appearance and more resistance to trauma during intercourse, when re-established [353]. The donor site may be taken from the abdomen, buttock, thigh, or axilla and is chosen according to surgeon’s preference and the pattern of injury. In cases of extensive destruction of deeper tissues, or if later prosthetic placement is being considered, skin flaps, with their secure vascular supply, can be used. 4.5.4.6. Penile avulsion injuries and amputation Acute management involves resuscitation of the patient, and preparation for surgical re-implantation of the penis if it has been recovered and is not too badly damaged. Surgical re-implantation should be considered for all patients and should be performed within 24 hours of amputation [357]. The severed penis should be washed with sterile saline, wrapped in saline-soaked gauze, placed in a sterile bag, and immersed in iced water. The penis must not come into direct contact with the ice. A pressure dressing or a tourniquet should be placed around the penile stump to prevent excessive blood loss. Re-attachment can be achieved in a non-microsurgical way, but gives higher rates of post-operative urethral stricture and more problems with loss of sensation [358]. When operating microscopically, the corpora cavernosa and urethra are firstly aligned and repaired. Subsequently, the dorsal penile arteries, the dorsal vein and the dorsal nerves are anastomosed. The cavernosal arteries are generally too small to anastomose. The fascia and skin are closed in layers and both a urethral and a suprapubic catheter are placed [359]. If the severed penis cannot be found, or is unsuitable for re-attachment, then the end should be closed as it is done in partial penectomy. Later reconstruction may be employed to lengthen the penis (e.g., suspensory ligament division and V-Y plasty, pseudo-glans formation with split-thickness skin grafting, etc.). A delayed major reconstructive procedure, i.e. phalloplasty (either radial artery or pubic), is sometimes required for injuries which leave a very small or non-functioning penile stump [357]. 4.5.4.7. Testicular dislocation It can be either a subcutaneous dislocation with epifascial displacement of the testis or an internal dislocation. In the latter, the testis is positioned in the superficial external inguinal ring, inguinal canal or abdominal cavity. Traumatic dislocation of the testis is treated by manual replacement and secondary orchidopexy. If primary manual reposition cannot be performed, immediate orchidopexy is indicated. 4.5.4.8. Haematocoele Conservative management is recommended in haematoceles smaller than three times the size of the contralateral testis [360]. In large haematoceles, non-operative management can fail, and delayed surgery (more than three days) is often required. Patients with large haematoceles have a higher rate of orchiectomy than patients who undergo early surgery, even in non-ruptured testes [293,314,321,361,362]. Early surgical intervention results in preservation of the testis in more than 90% of cases compared to delayed surgeries which result in orchiectomy in 45-55% of patients [321]. In addition, non-operative management is also associated with prolonged hospital stays. Therefore, large haematoceles should be treated surgically, irrespective of the presence of testicular contusion or rupture. At the very least, the blood clot should be evacuated from the tunica vaginalis sac to relieve disability and hasten recovery. 4.5.4.9. Testicular rupture It is essential to surgically explore equivocal patients whenever imaging studies cannot definitively exclude testicular rupture. This involves exploration with evacuation of blood clots and haematoma, excision of any necrotic testicular tubules and closure of the tunica albuginea, usually with running 3.0-absorbable sutures. 4.5.4.10. Penetrating scrotal trauma Penetrating injuries to the scrotum require surgical exploration with debridement of non-viable tissue. Depending on the extent of the injury, primary reconstruction of the testis and scrotum can usually be performed. In complete disruption of the spermatic cord, re-alignment without vaso-vasostomy may be considered if surgically feasible [363]. Staged secondary microsurgical vaso-vasostomy can be performed after rehabilitation, although only a few cases have been reported [363]. If there is extensive destruction of the tunica albuginea, mobilisation of a free tunica vaginalis flap can be performed for testicular closure. If the patient is unstable or reconstruction cannot be achieved, orchiectomy is then indicated. Prophylactic antibiotics are recommended after scrotal penetrating trauma, although data to support this approach are lacking. Extended laceration of scrotal skin requires surgical intervention for skin closure. Due to the elasticity of the scrotum, most defects can be primarily closed, even if the lacerated skin is only minimally attached to the scrotum [314]. Local wound management with extensive initial wound debridement and washout is important for scrotal convalescence. In the case of extensive loss of genital tissue, e.g., improvised explosive device blast injury, complex and staged reconstructive surgical procedures are often required [312]. Military testicular salvage rates increased over the last decades due to improvements of medical services (up to 67.6%) [364]. Table 4.5.1: Summary of key points for penile fracture and testicular trauma Summary of key points:Penile fractureThe most common causes of penile fracture are sexual intercourse, forced flexion, masturbation and rolling over.Penile fracture is associated with a sudden cracking or popping sound, pain, immediate detumescence and local swelling.MRI is superior to all other imaging techniques in diagnosing penile fracture.Management of penile fracture is surgical intervention with closure of the tunica albuginea.Testicular TraumaBlunt testicular injury may occur under intense compression of the testis against the inferior pubic ramus or symphysis, resulting in a rupture of the tunica albuginea.Testicular rupture is associated with immediate pain, nausea, vomiting, and sometimes fainting.Scrotal US is the preferred imaging modality for the diagnosis of testicular trauma.Surgical exploration in patients with testicular trauma ensures preservation of viable tissue when possible. 