11.4.1. Cryptorchidism. Cryptorchidism is the most common congenital abnormality of the male genitalia; at one year of age nearly 1% of all full-term male infants have cryptorchidism [1654]. Approximately 30% of undescended testes are non-palpable and may be located within the abdominal cavity. These guidelines will only deal with management of cryptorchidism in adults. 11.4.1.1. Classification The classification of cryptorchidism is based on the duration of the condition and the anatomical position of the testes. If the undescended testis has been identified from birth then it is termed congenital while diagnosis of acquired cryptorchidism refers to men in whom testes were situated within the scrotum. Cryptorchidism is categorised as bilateral or unilateral and the location of the testes (inguinal, intra-abdominal or ectopic). Studies have shown that treatment of congenital and acquired cryptorchidism results in similar hormonal profiles, semen analysis and testicular volumes [1655,1656]. However, testicular volume and hormonal function are reduced in adults treated for congenital bilateral cryptorchidism compared to unilateral cryptorchidism [1657]. 11.4.1.1.1.etiology and pathophysiology It has been postulated that cryptorchidism may be a part of the so-called testicular dysgenesis syndrome (TDS), which is a developmental disorder of the gonads caused by environmental and/or genetic influences early in pregnancy, including exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals. Besides cryptorchidism, TDS includes hypospadias, reduced fertility, increased risk of malignancy, and Leydig/Sertoli cell dysfunction [1658]. Cryptorchidism has also been linked with maternal gestational smoking [1659] and premature birth [1660]. 11.4.1.1.2. Pathophysiological effects in maldescended testes 11.4.1.1.2.1. Degeneration of germ cells The degeneration of germ cells in maldescended testes is apparent even after the first year of life and varies, depending on the position of the testes [1661]. During the second year, the number of germ cells declines further. Treatment between the age of six to 18 months is therefore recommended to conserve spermatogonial stem cells, safe guard future spermatogenesis and hormone production, as well as to decrease the risk for tumours [1662]. Surgical treatment is the most effective. Meta-analyses on the use of medical treatment with GnRH and hCG have demonstrated poor success rates [1663,1664]. It has been reported that hCG treatment may be harmful to future spermatogenesis [1665]. The EAU Guidelines on Paediatric Urology do not recommend endocrine treatment to achieve testicular descent on a routine basis, but endocrine treatment with GnRH analogues in boys with bilateral undescended testis is recommended [1666]. There is increasing evidence to suggest that in unilateral undescended testis, the contralateral normal descended testis may also have structural abnormalities, including smaller volume, softer consistency and reduced markers of future fertility potential (spermatogonia/tubule ratio and dark spermatogonia) [1655,1667]. This implies that unilateral cryptorchidism may affect the contralateral testis and patients and parents should be counselled appropriately. 11.4.1.1.2.2. Relationship with fertility Semen parameters are often impaired in men with a history of cryptorchidism [1668]. Early surgical treatment may have a positive effect on subsequent fertility [1669]. In men with a history of unilateral cryptorchidism, paternity is almost equal (89.7%) to that in men without cryptorchidism (93.7%). Outcome studies for untreated bilateral undescended testes revealed that 100% are oligospermic and 75% azoospermic men. Among those successfully treated for bilateral undescended testes, 75% still remain oligospermic and 42% azoospermic [1670]. It is also important to screen for hypogonadism, as this is a potential long-term sequelae of cryptorchidism and could contribute to impaired fertility and potential problems such as testosterone deficiency and MetS [1671]. 11.4.1.1.2.3. Germ cell tumours As a component of TDS, cryptorchidism is a risk factor for testicular cancer and is associated with testicular microcalcifications and intratubular germ cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS), formerly known as carcinoma in situ (CIS) of the testes. In 5-10% of testicular cancers, there is a history of cryptorchidism [1672]. The risk of a germ cell tumour is 3.6-7.4 times higher than in the general population and 2-6% of men with a history of cryptorchidism will develop a testicular tumour [1654]. Orchidopexy performed before the onset of puberty has been reported to decrease the risk of testicular cancer [1673]. However, there is evidence to suggest that even men who undergo early orchidopexy still harbour a higher risk of testicular cancer than men without cryptorchidism [1674]. Therefore, all men with a history of cryptorchidism should be warned that they are at increased risk of developing testicular cancer and should perform regular testicular self-examination [1675]. 11.4.1.2. Disease management 11.4.1.2.1. Hormonal treatment Human chorionic gonadotropin or GnRH is not recommended for the treatment of cryptorchidism in adulthood. 11.4.1.2.2. Surgical treatment In adolescence, removal of an intra-abdominal testis (with a normal contralateral testis) can be recommended, because of the risk of malignancy [1676]. In adults, with a palpable undescended testis and a normal functioning contralateral testis (i.e., biochemically eugonadal), an orchidectomy may be offered as there is evidence that the undescended testis confers a higher risk of GCNIS and future development of a GCT [1677] and regular testicular self-examination is not an option in these patients. In patients with unilateral undescended testis and impaired testicular function on the contralateral testis as demonstrated by biochemical hypogonadism and/or impaired sperm production (infertility), an orchidopexy may be offered to preserve androgen production and fertility. However, based on Panel consensus multiple biopsies of the unilateral undescended testis are recommended at the time of orchidopexy to exclude intra-testicular GCNIS as a prognostic indicator of future development of GCT. As indicated above, the correction of bilateral cryptorchidism, even in adulthood, can lead to sperm production in previously azoospermic men and therefore may be considered in these patients or in patients who place a high value on fertility preservation [1678]. Vascular damage is the most severe complication of orchidopexy and can cause testicular atrophy in 1-2% of cases. In men with non-palpable testes, the post-operative atrophy rate was 12% in cases with long vascular pedicles that enabled scrotal positioning. Post-operative atrophy in staged orchidopexy has been reported in up to 40% of patients [1679]. At the time of orchidectomy in the treatment of GCT, biopsy of the contralateral testis should be offered to patients at high risk for GCNIS (i.e., history of cryptorchidism, < 12 mL testicular volume, poor spermatogenesis [1680]). 11.4.1.3. Summary of evidence recommendations for cryptorchidism Summary of evidenceLECryptorchidism is multifactorial in origin and can be caused by genetic factors and endocrine disruption early in pregnancy.2aCryptorchidism is often associated with testicular dysgenesis and is a risk factor for infertility and GCTs and patients should be counselled appropriately.2bPaternity in men with corrected unilateral cryptorchidism is almost equal to men without cryptorchidism.1bBilateral cryptorchidism significantly reduces the likelihood of paternity and patients should be counselled appropriately.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not use hormonal treatment for cryptorchidism in post-pubertal men.StrongPerform simultaneous testicular biopsy, for the detection of intratubular germ cell neoplasia in situ (formerly carcinoma in situ), if undescended testes are corrected in adulthood.StrongOffer adult men with unilateral undescended testis and normal hormonal function/spermatogenesis orchidectomy.StrongOffer adult men with unilateral or bilateral undescended testis with biochemical hypogonadism and or spermatogenic failure (i.e., infertility) unilateral or bilateral orchidopexy, if technically feasible.Weak 