11.4.2. Germ cell malignancy and male infertility. Testicular germ cell tumour (TGCT) is the most common malignancy in Caucasian men aged 15-40 years, and affects approximately 1% of sub-fertile men [1681]. The lifetime risk of TGCT varies among ethnic groups and countries. The highest annual incidence of TGCT occurs in Caucasians, and varies from 10/100,000 (e.g., in Denmark and Norway) to 2/100,000 (e.g., in Finland and the Baltic countries). Generally, seminomas and non-seminomas are preceded by GCNIS, and untreated GCNIS eventually progresses to invasive cancer [1682-1684]. There has been a general decline in male reproductive health and an increase in testicular cancer in western countries [1685,1686]. In almost all countries with reliable cancer registries, the incidence of testicular cancer has increased [1635,1687]. This has been postulated to be related to TDS, which is a developmental disorder of the testes caused by environmental and/or genetic influences in pregnancy. Endocrine disrupting chemicals have also been associated with sexual dysfunction [1688] and abnormal semen parameters [1689]. These cancers arise from premalignant gonocytes or GCNIS [1690]. Testicular microcalcification, seen on US, can be associated with TGCT and GCNIS of the testes [1642,1691,1692]. 11.4.2.1. Testicular germ cell cancer and reproductive function All men with cancer must be offered sperm cryopreservation prior to the therapeutic use of gonadotoxic agents or ablative surgery that may impair spermatogenesis or ejaculation (i.e., chemotherapy, radiotherapy or retroperitoneal surgery) [1693,1694]. Men with TGCT have decreased semen quality, even before cancer treatment. Azoospermia has been observed in 24% of men with TGCT [1695] and oligospermia in 50% [1696]. Given that the average ten-year survival rate for testicular cancer is 98% and it is the most common cancer in men of reproductive potential, it is mandatory to include counselling regarding fertility preservation prior to any gonadotoxic treatment [1696,1697]. All patients should be offered ejaculated semen preservation as the most cost-effective strategy for fertility preservation, or sperm extracted surgically (e.g., c/mTESE). Indeed, treatment for TGCT, including orchidectomy because of the risk of a non-functioning remaining testicle, may have a negative impact on reproductive function [1695]. If shown to be azoospermic or severely oligozoospermic, it is recommended that men should undergo sperm cryopreservation prior to orchidectomy to allow an opportunity to perform a concomitant TESE and prior to further potential gonadotoxic/ablative surgery [1696]. The surgical principles in onco-TESE do not differ from the technique of TESE for men with infertility (e.g., NOA) [1698,1699]. In this context, it is recommended to organise cryopreservation care delivery networks that enables referral to a urologist adept in TESE. Rates of under-utilisation of semen analysis and sperm cryopreservation have been reported to be high; resulting in the failure to identify azoospermic or severely oligozoospermic patients at diagnosis who may benefit from advanced fertility-preserving procedures such as oncoTESE. The argument that performing cryopreservation prior to orchidectomy may delay subsequent treatment is not supported by contemporary clinical practice, indeed adverse impact on survival has not been investigated. In this context, orchidectomy should not be unduly delayed if there are no facilities for cryopreservation or there is a potential delay in treatment. Since chemotherapy and RT are teratogenic, contraception must be used during treatment and for at least six months after completion [1700]. Both chemotherapy and RT can impair fertility. Long-term infertility is rare after RT and dose-cumulative-dependent with chemotherapy. Treatment of TGCT can result in additional impairment of semen quality [1701] and increased sperm aneuploidy up to two years following gonadotoxic therapy [1702]. Spermatogenesis usually recovers one to four years after chemotherapy [74]. Chemotherapy is also associated with DNA damage and an increased SDF rate [1703]. However, sperm aneuploidy levels often decline to pre-treatment levels 18-24 months after treatment [1702]. Several studies reviewing the offspring of cancer survivors have not shown a significant increased risk of genetic abnormalities in the context of previous chemotherapy and radiotherapy [1704]. In addition to spermatogenic failure, patients with TGCT have Leydig cell dysfunction, even in the contralateral testis [1705]. The measurement of pre-treatment levels of testosterone, SHBG, LH and oestradiol may help to stratify those patients at increased risk of hypogonadism and provide a baseline for post-treatment hypogonadism. The risk of hypogonadism may be increased in men treated for TGCT. Likewise, the risk of hypogonadism is increased in the survivors of testicular cancer and serum testosterone levels should be evaluated during the management of these patients [1706]. However, this risk is greatest at 6-12 months post-treatment and suggests that there may be some improvement in Leydig cell function after treatment. Therefore, it is reasonable to delay initiation of testosterone therapy, until the patient shows continuous signs or symptoms of testosterone deficiency [1682]. The risk of low libido and erectile dysfunction is also increased in TGCT patients [1707]. Patients treated for TGCT are also at increased risk of CVD [1703]. Therefore, patients may require a multi-disciplinary therapy approach and, in this context, survivorship programmes incorporating a holistic view of patients considering psychological, medical and social needs could be beneficial. In patients who place a high value on fertility potential, the use of testosterone therapy in men with symptoms suggestive for TDS needs to be balanced with worsening spermatogenesis. In these patients consideration can be given to the use of selective oestrogen receptor modulators (SERMs; e.g., clomiphene) or gonadotrophin analogues (e.g., hCG), although these are off-label treatments in this particular clinical setting. 11.4.2.2. Testicular microcalcification (TM) Microcalcification inside the testicular parenchyma can be found in 0.6-9% of men referred for testicular US [1708,1709]. Although the true incidence of TM in the general population is unknown, it is most probably rare. Ultrasound findings of TM have been seen in men with TGCT, cryptorchidism, infertility, testicular torsion and atrophy, Klinefelter syndrome, hypogonadism, Disorders of Sex Development and varicocele [1659]. The incidence reported seems to be higher with high-frequency US machines [1710]. The relationship between TM and infertility is unclear, but may relate to testicular dysgenesis, with degenerate cells being sloughed inside an obstructed seminiferous tubule and failure of the Sertoli cells to phagocytose the debris. Subsequently, calcification with hydroxyapatite occurs. Testicular microcalcification is found in testes at risk of malignant development, with a reported incidence of TM in men with TGCT of 6-46% [1711-1713]. A systematic review and meta-analysis of case-control studies indicated that the presence of TM is associated with a ~18-fold higher odds ratio for testicular cancer in infertile men (pooled OR: 18.11, 95% CI: 8.09, 40.55; p < 0.0001) [1642]. Testicular microcalcification should therefore be considered pre-malignant in this setting and patients counselled accordingly. Testicular biopsies from men with TM have found a higher prevalence of GCNIS, especially in those with bilateral microcalcifications [1714]. However, TM can also occur in benign testicular conditions and the microcalcification itself is not malignant. Therefore, the association of TM and TGCT is controversial and the challenge is to identify those men at risk of harbouring GCNIS and future risk of TGCT. Further investigation of the association between TM and GCNIS requires testicular biopsies in large series of men without signs of TGCT with or without risk factors for TGCT. However, clinicians and patients should be reassured that testicular cancer does not develop in most men with asymptomatic TM [1692]. Men potentially at high-risk of harbouring or developing GCNIS include those with infertility, atrophic testes, undescended testes, history of TGCT, and contralateral TM and it has been suggested that men with these risk factors could be offered testicular biopsy [1686,1691]. Patients with a history of TGCT and TM in the contralateral testis and sub-fertile patients have been demonstrated to have an increased risk of GCNIS [1692], while there are only a few studies showing a further increase in GCNIS with TM in the context of cryptorchidism [1686,1709,1715]. A useful algorithm has been proposed [1686] to stratifying those patients at increased risk of GCNIS who may benefit from testicular biopsy. However, when undertaking a biopsy in this setting, the full risks and complications of adopting this strategy must be explained to the patient. Decastro et al., [1716] suggested that testicular cancer would not develop in most men with TM (98.4%) during a five-year follow-up. As such, an extensive screening programme would only benefit men at significant risk. In this context it would be prudent to advise patients with TM and risk factors for testicular cancer to at least undergo regular testicular examination. It has been suggested that these patients could also be offered annual physical examination by a urologist and US follow-up, although follow-up protocols may be difficult to implement in this invariably young cohort of patients [1659]. As testicular atrophy and infertility have an association with testicular cancer, some authors recommend biopsy or follow-up US if TM is seen [1686]. However, most patients who are azoospermic will be undergoing therapeutic biopsy (i.e., with the specific purpose of sperm retrieval) and therefore a definitive diagnosis can be made and there is a lack of evidence demonstrating a higher prevalence of testicular cancer in patients with both TM and testicular atrophy. In patients with incidental TM, the risk of GCNIS is low and a logical approach is to instruct patients to perform regular testicular self-examination. 11.4.2.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for germ cell malignancy and testicular microcalcification Summary of evidenceLETesticular germ cell tumour (TGCT) affects approximately 1% of sub-fertile men.2bMen with TGCT frequently have impaired sperm parameters at diagnosis.2aSemen analysis and sperm cryopreservation before orchidectomy allows the identification of TGCT patients with azoospermia, who may benefit from concomitant surgical sperm retrieval (i.e., onco-TESE).2bTreatment of TGCT can result in decreased sperm quality, sperm aneuploidy, increased sperm DNA fragmentation (SDF), hypogonadism, sexual dysfunction and cardiovascular diseases.2aTesticular microcalcifications (TM) can be found in men with benign conditions (e.g., cryptorchidism, infertility, testicular torsion and atrophy, Klinefelter syndrome, hypogonadism, DSD, varicocele) and (pre)malignant (GCNIS) or malignant conditions (TGCT).2aTesticular microcalcifications are associated with a higher risk of testicular cancer in infertile men.1aMen potentially at risk for harbouring or developing GCNIS include those with bilateral TM, infertility, atrophic testes, undescended testes, history of TGCT, and contralateral TM.2aSince TGCT will not develop in most men with TM, an extensive screening programme or invasive testicular biopsy is not indicated without additional risk factors.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingAdvise men with testicular microcalcification (TM) to perform self-examination even without additional risk factors, as this may result in early detection of a testicular germ cell tumour (TGCT).WeakDo not perform testicular biopsy, follow-up scrotal ultrasound (US), measure biochemical tumour markers, or abdominal or pelvic computed tomography, in men with isolated TM without associated risk factors (e.g., infertility, cryptorchidism, testicular cancer, and atrophic testis).StrongOffer testicular biopsy to infertile men with TM, who belong to one of the following higher risk groups: spermatogenic failure (infertility), bilateral TM, atrophic testes (< 12 mL), history of undescended testes and TGCT.WeakPerform inguinal surgical exploration with testicular biopsy or offer orchidectomy after multi-disciplinary team meeting and discussion with the patient, if there are suspicious findings on physical examination or US in patients with TM with associated lesions.StrongManage men treated for TGCT in a multi-disciplinary team setting with a dedicated late-effects clinic and survivorship program, since they are at increased risk of developing hypogonadism, sexual dysfunction and cardiovascular risk.StrongPerform sperm cryopreservation prior to planned orchidectomy or before additional neoadjuvant or adjuvant oncological therapies.StrongOffer onco-testicular sperm extraction (onco-TESE) at the time of radical orchidectomy in men with testicular cancer and azoospermia or severe abnormalities in their semen parameters.Strong 