4.1.4.3. Surgical management. 4.1.4.3.1. Bladder wall injection of botulinum toxin A OnabotulinumtoxinA (onabotA; BOTOX®) 100 U is licenced in Europe to treat OAB with persistent or refractory UUI in adults of both sexes [241,242]. Surgeons should be aware that other doses of onabotA and other formulations of botulinum toxin A, abobotulinumtoxin A and incobotulinumtoxin A, are not licensed for use in OAB/UUI. Doses for onabotA are not transposable to the other brands of onabotulinumtoxinA. The continued efficacy of repeat injections is usual, but discontinuation rates may be high [243,244]. The most important adverse events related to onabotA 100 U injection detected in the regulatory trials were UTI and an increase in PVR volume that may require CISC [245]. A SR included ten studies on 2,055 patients comparing intravesical onabotA injection with placebo. OnabotulinumtoxinA was more effective than placebo in improvement of mean symptoms score, reduction of mean urgency episodes, mean UUI episodes, mean frequency episodes, mean nocturia episodes [11]. No statistically significant difference was found between onabotA and placebo in change of mean voided volumes or maximum cystometric capacity. OnabotulinumtoxinA was associated with significantly higher rates of voiding dysfunction compared to placebo at both 100 unit dose and 200 unit dose, and significantly higher rates of UTI both at 100-unit dose and 200-unit dose. A Cochrane review reported no significant difference in PVR volume between the onabotA and placebo groups [246]. Quality of life was substantially improved in the onabotA arm, as shown by the > 2.5 times improvement in Incontinence Quality of Life Questionnaire (I-QOL) scores compared to baseline. Cohort studies have shown the effectiveness of bladder wall injections of onabotA in elderly and frail elderly people [247], although the success rate might be lower and the PVR volume (> 150 mL) higher in this group. The median time to request retreatment in the pooled analysis of the two RCTs was 24 weeks [242,245]. Follow-up over 3.5 years showed consistent or increasing duration of effect for each subsequent treatment, with a median of 7.5 months. Considerable differences were noted in patients’ outcomes on secondary analysis [248]. Two RCTs on 545 patients compared onabotA injections with antimuscarinics. OnabotulinumtoxinA was significantly more effective in curing UUI, but no significant difference was noted in the reduction of mean UUI episodes. However, it was associated with significantly higher rates of voiding dysfunction than antimuscarinics, and UTIs [11]. Identification of DO in urodynamics does not appear to influence the outcome of onabotnA injections in patients with UUI [249]. 4.1.4.3.1.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for bladder wall injection of onabotulinumtoxinA Summary of evidenceLEA single treatment session of onabotA (100 U) injected in the bladder wall is more effective than placebo at curing and improving UUI/OAB symptoms and improving QoL.1aThere is no evidence that repeated injections of onabotA have reduced efficacy, but discontinuation rates are high.2aThere is a risk of voiding dysfunction, increased PVR volume and UTI with onabotA injections.1aThe risk of bacteriuria after onabotA (100 U) injection is high but the clinical significance of this remains uncertain.1bOnabotulinumtoxinA is more effective in curing UUI but similarly effective in reducing mean UUI episodes compared with antimuscarinics.1aOnabotulinumtoxinA is associated with higher rates of voiding dysfunction than antimuscarinics.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer bladder wall injections of onabotulinumtoxinA (100 U) to patients with OAB/UUI refractory to conservative therapy or drug treatment.StrongWarn patients of the limited duration of response, risk of UTI and possible prolonged need for clean intermittent self-catheterisation prior to offering treatment with onabotulinumtoxinA.Strong 4.1.4.3.2. Sacral nerve stimulation Sacral nerve stimulation (SNS) involves placing electrodes adjacent to the sacral nerve roots and delivering an electric current to the area via an attached battery implanted in the buttock. This delivers low-amplitude stimulation resulting in modulation of neural activity and stabilisation of bladder electrical activity through a mechanism that is, as yet, not fully understood. In most centres, test stimulation with a temporary or permanent electrode is performed to assess response, before undertaking permanent stimulator implantation. Currently, the only reliable predictor for treatment success in SNS is test stimulation. A SR did not find predictive factors of success due to low level of evidence of included studies (small, retrospective, and heterogeneous populations) [250]. All randomised studies suffer from the limitation that patients cannot be blinded to the treatment allocation since all recruited patients have to respond to a test phase before randomisation. The ROSETTA trial randomised 386 women with refractory UUI to SNS (n = 194 women) or intradetrusor injection of onabotA (n = 192 women) [251]. At two years, the authors found no statistically significant difference between SNS and onabotA in improvement of mean symptom scores on OABq-SF or in reducing the mean UUI daily episodes. Patients reported significantly higher satisfaction with onabotA, but also significantly higher rates of recurrent UTIs than SNS (24% vs. 10%, respectively). On the other hand, SNS was associated with 9% removal rate and 3% revision rate at two-years follow-up. The INSITE trial randomised 70 (94% women) patients to SNS implantation and 77 patients (92% women) to receive antimuscarinics [252]. At six months follow-up, results showed statistically significant higher success rate for SNS compared to antimuscarinics – success was defined as > 50% improvement in daily UUI or frequency episodes. Adverse events occurred in 30% and 27% of SNS and antimuscarinics trial arms, respectively, none were serious. SNS was associated with higher rates of UTIs and was associated with implant site infection and lead migration in 3.4% of cases each. A Cochrane review [253] identified three RCTs that investigated SNS in patients with refractory UUI. The majority of studies compared a strategy of immediate implantation with delayed implantation. One study compared implantation to controls who stayed on medical treatment and received delayed implantation at six months. Fifty percent of the immediately implanted group had > 90% improvement in UUI at six months compared with 1.6% of the control group [254]. The effect on QoL measured by the SF-36, was unclear as it differed between the groups in only one of the eight dimensions. The other RCT achieved similar results, although these patients had already been included in the first report [255]. Another SR of studies including SNS with > 6 months follow-up reported dry rates of 43–56% [256]. Adverse events occurred in 50% of implanted cases, with surgical revision necessary in 33–41% [257,258]. In a sub-analysis of the RCT similar success rates were found in patients with or without urodynamic DO [259]. 4.1.4.3.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for sacral nerve stimulation Summary of evidenceLESacral nerve stimulation is more effective than continuation of failed conservative treatment for OAB/UUI, but no sham controls have been used.1bSacral nerve stimulation is as effective as onabotA 200 U injection at 24 months.1bIn patients who have been implanted, 50% improvement of UUI is maintained in > 50% of patients and 15% may remain cured at four years.3 RecommendationStrength ratingOffer sacral nerve stimulation to patients who have overactive bladder/urge urinary incontinence refractory to anticholinergic therapy.Strong 4.1.4.3.3. Laser treatment A recent SR evaluated the use of vaginal lasers in the treatment of OAB in short term studies detailing minimal improvement [260]. No RCTs were included, the quality of reported studies were weak and long-term safety data were also lacking. 4.1.4.3.3.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for laser treatment Summary of evidenceLEVaginal laser therapy shows minimal OAB symptom improvement in the short term, with minimal complications, however, long-term efficacy and safety data is lacking.3 RecommendationStrength ratingDo not offer vaginal laser therapy to treat overactive bladder symptoms outside of a well-regulated clinical research trial.Strong 4.1.4.3.4. Cystoplasty/urinary diversion 4.1.4.3.4.1. Augmentation cystoplasty In augmentation cystoplasty (also known as clam cystoplasty), a detubularised segment of bowel is inserted into the bivalved bladder wall. Most of the evidence pertaining to cystoplasty comes from patients with neuropathic bladder dysfunction. One study did not find any difference between bivalving the bladder in the sagittal or coronal plane [261,262]. The procedure can be done, with equal success by open or robotic techniques, although the latter takes more time [263]. There are no RCTs comparing bladder augmentation to other treatments for patients with OAB/UUI. A large case series of bladder augmentation in a mixed population of idiopathic and neurogenic UUI included 51 women [264]. At an average follow-up of 74.5 months, only 53% were continent and satisfied with the surgery, whereas 25% had occasional leaks and 18% continued to have disabling UUI. The results for idiopathic DO (58%) were less satisfactory than for neurogenic UUI (90%). Malignant transformation was not reported in this series; however, it has been documented in other series and a SR [265-267]. Fewer than 60 cases have been reported worldwide, and almost all are exclusively beyond ten years after the original cystoplasty [268]. Adverse effects are common and have been summarised in a review with five to seventeen years follow-upof > 267 cases; 61 of which had non-neurogenic UUI [269]. Short-term complications include bowel obstruction (2%), infection (1.5%), thromboembolism (1%), bleeding (0.75%) and fistula (0.4%). In the long term, patients may require CISC to obtain adequate bladder emptying (38%). Other long-term effects include asymptomatic bacteriuria (70%), changes in bowel symptoms (25%), UTI (20%), metabolic disturbances (16%), urinary tract stones (13%), deterioration in renal function (2%), and bladder perforation (0.75%). It is unclear if mucolytic agents reduce mucus accumulation. The only RCT comparing various mucolytic agents did not find significant benefits with the use of N-acetylcysteine, aspirin, or ranitidine. In one small study (n = 40), subcutaneous octreotide immediately before, and for fifteen days after surgery yielded significant reductions in mucus production, the need for bladder irrigation to clear blockages, and mean duration of hospital stay [270]. Before cystoplasty, all potential complications should be outlined, and before and after surgery, patients should be well supported by stoma/continence nurses. Depending on the relative costs of onabotA and augmentation cystoplasty, the latter can be cost-effective within 5 years if the complication rate is low and duration of effect of onabotA is < 5 months [271]. 4.1.4.3.4.2. Detrusor myectomy (bladder auto-augmentation) Detrusor myectomy aims to increase bladder capacity and reduce storage pressure by incising or excising a portion of the detrusor muscle, to create a bladder mucosal bulge or pseudo-diverticulum. It was initially described as an alternative to bladder augmentation in children [272]. Two case series in adult patients with idiopathic and neurogenic bladder dysfunction demonstrated poor long-term results caused by fibrosis of the pseudo-diverticulum [273,274]. This technique is rarely, if ever, used nowadays. 4.1.4.3.4.3. Urinary Diversion Urinary diversion remains a reconstructive option for patients with intractable UI after multiple pelvic procedures, radiotherapy or pelvic pathology leading to irreversible sphincteric incompetence or fistula formation. Options include ileal conduit urinary diversion, orthotopic neobladder and heterotopic neobladder with Mitrofanoff continent catheterisable conduit. There is insufficient evidence to comment on which procedure leads to the most improved QoL. A small study comparing ileal with colonic conduits concluded that there are no differences in the relative risks (RR) of UUT infection and uretero-intestinal stenosis. However, no studies have specifically examined these techniques for treatment of intractable OAB/UUI [261]. Therefore, careful consideration of which operation is undertaken depends on thorough preoperative counselling, access to stoma/continence nurses, as well as patient factors to allow for fully informed patient choice. 4.1.4.3.4.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for cystoplasty/urinary diversion Summary of evidenceLEThere is limited evidence of the effectiveness of augmentation cystoplasty and urinary diversion specifically for treatment of idiopathic OAB or UUI.3Augmentation cystoplasty and urinary diversion are associated with high risks of short- and long-term severe complications.3The need to perform CISC following augmentation cystoplasty is common.3There is no evidence comparing the efficacy or adverse effects of augmentation cystoplasty to urinary diversion.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingEnsure patient counselling and life-long support both prior to and after major surgery as a treatment for overactive bladder (OAB) is provided by a specialist nurse or equivalent health care provider.StrongOffer augmentation cystoplasty to patients with OAB/urge urinary incontinence (UUI) who have failed all other treatment options and have been informed about all possible complications.WeakInform patients undergoing augmentation cystoplasty of the high risk of clean intermittent self-catheterisation (ensure they are willing and able to do so) and that they will need life-long surveillance.StrongDo not offer detrusor myectomy as a treatment for UUI.WeakOnly offer urinary diversion to patients who have failed less-invasive therapies for the treatment of OAB/UUI, who will accept a stoma and have been warned about the possible small risk of malignancy.Weak 