3.5.4. Prostate cancer (PCa). A considerable number of observational studies have failed to demonstrate any association between circulating higher testosterone levels and PCa [138]. In contrast, studies investigating the relationship between low levels of testosterone and risk of PCa have found that men with very low levels of fT have a reduced risk of developing low-to-intermediate-grade PCa, but have a non-significantly increased chance of developing high-grade PCa [138]. This peculiar pattern was also reported in trials such as the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT) and the Reduction by Dutasteride of Prostate Cancer Events (REDUCE), with varying magnitudes of significance [139]. A meta-analysis, including 27 placebo-controlled, RCTs, found no evidence of increased PSA levels following testosterone therapy for one-year. When considering eleven studies reporting on the occurrence of PCa, the meta-analysis found no evidence of increased risk of PCa. However, a one year follow-up may be considered too short to draw firm conclusions on the risks of developing PCa. Furthermore, the analysis was restricted to studies with > 1-year follow-up, but no significant changes in PSA levels nor increased risk of PCa were found [132]. After five-year of median follow-up in three independent registry studies with > 1,000 patients undergoing testosterone therapy, PCa occurrence always remained below the reported incidence rate in the general population [140]. Similar results were reported by a large observational study including 10,311 men treated with testosterone therapy and 28,029 controls with a median follow-up of 5.3 years [141]. The same study, also showed that the risk of PCa was decreased for men in the highest tertile of testosterone therapy cumulative dose exposure as compared with controls [141]. Recently, the TRAVERSE study, a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, noninferiority trial involving 5246 men aged 45 to 80 years, who had pre-existing or a high risk of CVD and who have been treated because of low testosterone levels (i.e., total T < 10.4 nmol/L) associated with reported symptoms of hypogonadism, did not show any difference in terms of PCa incidence or high-grade PCa rate between arms (testosterone therapy vs. placebo) at a mean follow-up, was 33.0± (SD) 12.1 months. Conversely, the same trial showed a significantly greater increase from baseline of total PSA in the treatment group as compared with the placebo arm [77]. With regards to PCa survivors, safety in terms of the risk of recurrence and progression has not yet been established. Limited data are available in the literature, with most case series not providing sufficient data to draw definitive conclusions (e.g., insufficient follow-up, small samples, lack of control arms, heterogeneity in study population and treatment regimen, etc.) [142]. A meta-analysis derived from thirteen studies including 608 patients, of whom 109 had a history of high-risk PCa, with follow-up of 1-189.3 months [143], suggested that testosterone therapy did not increase the risk of biochemical recurrence, but the available evidence is poor, limiting data interpretation [143]. Similar considerations can be derived from another, larger meta-analysis of 21 studies [144]. However, it is important to recognise both meta-analyses demonstrated high heterogeneity among the different studies and included a limited number of subjects. An RCT assessing the safety/benefit ratio of testosterone therapy in hypogonadal men successfully treated with prostatectomy for non-aggressive prostate PCa is currently ongoing [145]. In conclusion, recent literature does not support an increased risk of PCa in hypogonadal men undergoing testosterone therapy. Although it is mandatory to avoid testosterone administration in men with advanced PCa, insufficient long-term prospective data on the safety of testosterone therapy in PCa survivors [144], should prompt caution in choosing to treat symptomatic hypogonadal men in this setting. In particular, patients should receive comprehensive counselling regarding the uncertain long-term effects of testosterone therapy in this context, which necessitates further investigation. Due to the lack of strong evidence-based data on safety, the possible use of testosterone therapy in symptomatic hypogonadal men previously treated for PCa should be fully discussed with patients and limited to low-risk individuals. 