3.5.8. Follow-up. Testosterone therapy alleviates symptoms and signs of hypogonadism in men in a specific time-dependent manner. The TTrials clearly showed that testosterone therapy improved sexual symptoms as early as three months after initiation [93]. Similar results have been derived from meta-analyses [78,85]. Hence, the first evaluation should be planned after three months of treatment. Further evaluation may be scheduled at six months or twelve months, according to patient characteristics, as well as results of biochemical testing (see below). Patients at high risk of developing elevated haematocrit should be evaluated every three months during the first year of testosterone therapy and at least every six months thereafter. Accordingly, current guidelines suggest that haematocrit should be maintained below 45% in patients with polycythaemia vera to avoid thromboembolism risk [188]. Similarly, data derived using a multi-institutional database including a large cohort of hypogonadal (total testosterone < 12 nmol/L) men who received testosterone therapy and subsequently did (n=5,887) or did not (n=4,2784) develop polycythaemia (haematocrit > 52%) showed that men who had an increased haematocrit had a higher risk of MACE or venous thromboembolism mostly during the first year of therapy [189]. The risk was even higher when a haematocrit threshold of 54% was considered whilst no risk was observed when a 50% threshold was applied [189]. Table 6 summarises the clinical and biochemical parameters that should be monitored during testosterone therapy. TTrials were designed to maintain the serum testosterone concentration within the normal range for young men (280–873 ng/dL or 9.6-30 nmol/L) [93]. This approach resulted in a good benefit/risk ratio. A similar approach could be considered during follow-up. The correct timing for the evaluation of testosterone levels varies according to the type of preparation used (Table 5). Testosterone is involved in the regulation of erythropoiesis [120] and prostate growth [61], hence evaluation of PSA and haematocrit should be mandatory before and during testosterone therapy. However, it is important to recognise that the risk of PCa in men aged < 40 years is low. Similarly, the mortality risk for PCa in men aged > 70 years has not been considered high enough to warrant monitoring in the general population [190]. Therefore, any screening for PCa through the determination of PSA and DRE in men aged < 40 or > 70 years during testosterone therapy should be discussed with the patients. Baseline and, at least, annual glyco-metabolic profile evaluation may be a reasonable consideration, particularly in the management of functional hypogonadism. Testosterone therapy may be beneficial for hypogonadal men with low or moderate fracture risk [107]; therefore, dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) bone scan may also be considered at baseline and 18-24 months following testosterone therapy, particularly in patients with more severe hypogonadism [107]. Digital rectal examination may detect prostate abnormalities that can be present even in men with normal PSA values. Hence, DRE is mandatory in all men at baseline and is recommended to be performed at least annually during testosterone therapy, as long as there is no significant increase in PSA velocity. The decision to stop testosterone therapy or to perform a prostate biopsy due to PSA increase or prostate abnormalities should be based on local PCa guidelines. There is a large consensus that any increase of haematocrit > 54% during testosterone therapy requires therapy withdrawal and phlebotomy to avoid potential adverse effects including venous-thromboembolism and CVD, especially in high-risk individuals. In patients with lower risk of relevant clinical sequelae, the situation can be alternatively managed by reducing testosterone dose and switching formulation along with venesection. A positive family history of venous-thromboembolism should be carefully investigated and the patient counselled about testosterone therapy to avoid/prevent thrombophilia-hypofibrinolysis [78]. Finally, caution should be exercised in men with pre-existing CVD or at higher risk of CVD [77]. Table 6: Clinical and biochemical parameters to be checked during testosterone therapy ParametersYear 1 of treatmentAfter year 1 of treatmentBaseline3 months6 months12 monthsAnnually18-24 monthsClinicalSymptomsXXXXXBody Mass IndexXXXWaist circumferenceXXXXDigital rectal examinationXXXBlood pressureXXXXBiochemistryPSA (ng/mL)XXX2XXHaematocrit (%)XXX1,2XXTestosteroneXXXXLipid and glycaemic profileXXXInstrumentalDEXAXX 1Population with polycythaemia vera or at high risk of secondary polycythaemia (e.g., sleep apnea, morbidobesity, heavy smokers, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease); 2Prostate cancer survivors. 