3.5.6. Erythrocytosis. An elevated haematocrit level is the most common adverse effect of testosterone therapy. Stimulation of erythropoiesis is a normal biological action that enhances the delivery of oxygen to testosterone-sensitive tissues (e.g., striated, smooth and cardiac muscle). Any elevation above the normal range for haematocrit usually becomes evident between three and twelve months after testosterone therapy initiation. However, polycythaemia can also occur after any subsequent increase in testosterone dose, switching from topical to parenteral administration and, development of comorbidity, which can be linked to an increase in haematocrit (e.g., respiratory or haematological diseases). There is no evidence that an increase of haematocrit up to and including 54% causes any adverse effects. If the haematocrit exceeds 54% there is a testosterone independent, but weak associated rise in CV events and mortality [79,177-179]. Any relationship is complex as these studies were based on patients with any cause of secondary polycythaemia, which included smoking and respiratory diseases. There have been no specific studies in men with only testosterone-induced erythrocytosis. As detailed, the TRAVERSE study, which had included symptomatic hypogonadal men aged 45-80 years who had pre-existing or a high risk of CVD, showed a mild higher incidence of pulmonary embolism, a component of the adjudicated tertiary end point of venous thromboembolic events, in the testosterone therapy than in the placebo group (0.9% vs. 0.5%) [77]. However, three previous large studies have not shown any evidence that testosterone therapy is associated with an increased risk of venous thromboembolism [180,181]. Of those, one study showed that an increased risk peaked at six months after initiation of testosterone therapy, and then declined over the subsequent period [182]. In one study venous thromboembolism was reported in 42 cases and 40 of these had a diagnosis of an underlying congenital thrombophilia (including factor V Leiden deficiency, prothrombin mutations and homocysteinuria) [183]. A meta-analysis of RCTs of testosterone therapy reported that venous thromboembolism was frequently related to underlying undiagnosed thrombophilia-hypofibrinolysis disorders [78]. In an RCT of testosterone therapy in men with chronic stable angina there were no adverse effects on coagulation, by assessment of tissue plasminogen activator or plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 enzyme activity or fibrinogen levels [184]. Similary, another meta-analysis and systematic review of RCTs found that testosterone therapy was not associated with an increased risk of venous thromboembolism [164]. With testosterone therapy elevated haematocrit levels are more likely to occur if the baseline level is toward the upper limit of normal prior to initiation. Added risks for raised haematocrit on testosterone therapy include smoking or respiratory conditions at baseline. Higher haematocrit is more common with parenteral rather than topical formulations. Accordingly, a large retrospective two-arm open registry, comparing the effects of long-acting testosterone undecanoate and testosterone gels showed that the former preparation was associated with a higher risk of haematocrit levels > 50%, when compared to testosterone gels [185]. In men with pre-existing CVD extra caution is advised with a definitive diagnosis of hypogonadism before initiating testosterone therapy and monitoring of testosterone as well as haematocrit during treatment. Elevated haematocrit in the absence of comorbidity or acute CV or venous thromboembolism can be managed by a reduction in testosterone dose, change in formulation or if the elevated haematocrit is very high by venesection (500 mL), even repeated if necessary, with usually no need to stop the testosterone therapy. 