3.5.3. Lower urinary tract symptoms/benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). A trial of 60 patients undergoing testosterone therapy for six months showed no significant differences on post-void residual urine and prostate volume, while storage symptoms as measured by IPSS significantly improved, despite an increase in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level [126]. A larger pre-treatment prostate volume was a predictive factor of improvement in LUTS. Similarly, a placebo-controlled RCT including 120 hypogonadal (total testosterone < 12 nmol/L) men with MetS and listed for BPH surgery, showed that testosterone therapy did not result in a difference in LUTS severity compared to placebo. Conversely, an improvement in ultrasound markers of inflammation in the expression of several pro-inflammatory genes was found in the treatment active arm [127]. A long-term study of 428 men undergoing testosterone therapy for eight years demonstrated significant improvements in IPSS, no changes in max flow rate (Qmax) and residual urine volume, but also a significant increase in prostate volume [128]. Similar data from the Registry of Hypogonadism in Men (RHYME), including 999 patients with a follow-up of three years, did not demonstrate any significant difference in PSA levels or total IPSS in men undergoing testosterone therapy, compared to untreated patients [129]. Similar results were reported in an Italian registry (SIAMO-NOI), collecting data from 432 hypogonadal men from fifteen centres [130]. Meta-analyses have not found significant changes in LUTS between patients treated with testosterone or placebo [131-137]. According to the most recent literature, there are no grounds to discourage testosterone therapy in hypogonadal patients with BPH/LUTS and there is evidence of limited benefit from androgen administration. The only concern is related to patients with severe LUTS (IPSS > 19), as they are usually excluded from RCTs; therefore, limiting the long-term safety data of testosterone therapy in this specific setting [61]. 