3.5.5. Cardiovascular Disease. Evidence suggests that hypogonadal men have an increased risk of CVD [146,147]. Whether or not LOH is a cause or a consequence of atherosclerosis has not been clearly determined. Late-onset hypogonadism is associated with CV risk factors, including central obesity, insulin resistance and hyperglycaemia, dyslipidaemia, pro-thrombotic tendency and chronic inflammatory state [147]. Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease, that releases pro-inflammatory cytokines into the circulation, which are known to suppress testosterone release from the HPG axis. Evidence from RCTs of testosterone therapy in men with MetS and/or T2DM demonstrates some benefit in CV risk, including reduced central adiposity, insulin resistance, total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol and suppression of circulating cytokines [28-30,35,147,148]. However, due to the equivocal nature of these studies, testosterone therapy cannot be recommended for use outside of treatment of specific symptoms. Published data show that LOH is associated with an increase in all-cause and CVD-related mortality [7,149-152]. These studies are supported by a meta-analysis that concluded that hypogonadism is a risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity [136] and mortality [153]. Importantly, men with low testosterone when compared to eugonadal men with angiographically proven coronary disease have twice the risk of earlier death [147]. Longitudinal population studies have reported that men with testosterone in the upper quartile of the normal range have a reduced number of CV events compared to men with testosterone in the lower three quartiles [149]. Androgen deprivation therapy for PCa is linked to an increased risk of CVD and sudden death [154]. Conversely, two long-term epidemiological studies have reported reduced CV events in men with high normal serum testosterone levels [155,156]. Erectile dysfunction is independently associated with CVD and may be the first clinical presentation in men with atherosclerosis. The knowledge that men with hypogonadism and/or ED may have underlying CVD should prompt individual assessment of their CV risk profile. Individual risk factors (e.g., lifestyle, diet, exercise, smoking, hypertension, diabetes and dyslipidaemia) should be assessed and treated in men with pre-existing CVD and in patients receiving androgen deprivation therapy. Cardiovascular risk reduction can be managed by primary care clinicians, but patients should be appropriately counselled by clinicians active in prescribing testosterone therapy [83]. If appropriate, patients should be referred to cardiologists for risk stratification and treatment of comorbidity. No RCTs have provided a clear answer on whether testosterone therapy affects CV outcomes. The TTrial (n=790) conducted in older men [157], the TIMES2 study (n=220) [29], along with the BLAST studies involving men with Metabolic Syndrome (MetS) and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM), as well as the study involving pre-frail and frail elderly men - all of which lasted for one year, and the T4DM study spanning two years - did not show any increase in Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events (MACE) increase in Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events (MACE) [29,32,33,157,158]. Randomised controlled trials, between three and twelve months, in men with known heart disease treated with testosterone have not found an increase in MACE, but have reported improvement in cardiac ischaemia, angina and functional exercise capacity [159-161]. A large cohort study (n=20,4857 men) found that neither transdermal gel or intramuscular testosterone was associated with an increased risk of composite cardiovascular outcome in men with or without prevalent CVD (mean follow-up 4.3 years) [162]. The European Medicines Agency (EMA) has stated that ‘The Co-ordination Group for Mutual recognition and Decentralisation Procedures-Human (CMDh), a regulatory body representing EU Member States, has agreed by consensus that there is no consistent evidence of an increased risk of heart problems with testosterone in men. However, the product information is to be updated in line with the most current available evidence on safety, and with warnings that the lack of testosterone should be confirmed by signs and symptoms and laboratory tests before treating men with these drugs [163]. Data recently released from the TRAVERSE study confirm the findings of the EMA [77]. The latter is the first double-blind, placebo-controlled, non-inferiority RCT with primary CV safety as an end point. The results showed that testosterone therapy was noninferior to placebo with respect to the incidence of MACE. However, a mild higher incidence of atrial fibrillation, acute kidney injury, and pulmonary embolism was observed in the testosterone group [77]. The latter observations, however, need to be confirmed since previous available data do not support an increased risk of venous thromboembolism [78,164] or major arrhythmias [165] after testosterone therapy. Similarly, the long-term follow-up (median of 5.1 years since last injection) of the T4DM study showed no differences in self-reported rates of new diagnosis of CVD [166]. In conclusion, current available data from interventional studies suggest that there is no increased risk up to three years of testosterone therapy [167-171]. The currently published evidence has reported that testosterone therapy in men with diagnosed hypogonadism has neutral or beneficial actions on MACE in patients with normalised testosterone levels. The findings could be considered sufficiently reliable for at least a three year course of testosterone therapy, after which no available study can exclude further or long-term CV events [172,173]. 3.5.5.1. Cardiac Failure Testosterone therapy is contraindicated in men with severe chronic cardiac failure because fluid retention may lead to exacerbation of the condition. Some studies have shown that men with moderate chronic cardiac failure may benefit from low doses of testosterone, which achieve mid-normal range testosterone levels [160,174,175]. An interesting observation is that untreated hypogonadism increased the re-admission and mortality rate in men with heart failure [176]. If a decision is made to treat hypogonadism in men with chronic cardiac failure, it is essential that the patient is followed up carefully with clinical assessment and both testosterone and haematocrit measurements on a regular basis. 