3.1.2. Organ preservation. In kidneys donated after cardiac death (DCD) evidence suggests that warm ischemia contributes to worse graft outcome. Donor hemodynamic parameters (systolic blood pressure, oxygen saturation and shock index: heart rate divided by systolic blood pressure) may be predictors of delayed graft function (DGF) and graft failure; however, further studies are required to validate this [22]. The duration of asystolic warm ischaemia during procurement in DCD donors is associated with increased risk of graft failure. Overall five year graft failure (including primary graft non-function) was associated with longer asystolic warm ischaemia times [23]. Extraction time (beginning with aortic cross-clamp and ending with placement of the kidneys on ice), is an important factor for DGF. Incidents of DGF were 27.8% and 60% at up to 60 minutes and 120 minutes extraction time, respectively [24]. A retrospective study of 64,024 living donor kidney transplants found that CIT, human leukocyte antigen (HLA) mismatch, donor age, panel reactive antibody, recipient diabetes, donor and recipient body mass index (BMI), recipient race and gender, right nephrectomy, open nephrectomy, dialysis status, ABO incompatibility, and previous transplants were independent predictors of DGF in living donor kidney transplants [25]. Five-year graft survival among living donor kidney transplant recipients with DGF was significantly lower than in those without DGF. Delayed graft function increased the risk of graft failure by more than 2-fold [25]. 3.1.2.1. Kidney storage solutions and cold storage There are two main sources for kidney graft injury: ischaemia (warm and cold), and reperfusion injury. The aims of modern kidney storage solutions include: control of cell-swelling during hypothermic ischaemia; maintenance of intra- and extra-cellular electrolyte gradient during ischaemia; buffering of acidosis; provision of energy reserve; and minimisation of oxidative reperfusion injury. There is no agreement on which of the mechanisms is most important for post-ischaemic renal graft function [26]. No storage solution seems to combine all mechanisms. Previously, Euro-Collins was widely used, but is no longer recommended. Presently, University of Wisconsin (UW), and histidine-tryptophan-ketoglutarate (HTK) solution are equally effective and are standard for multi-organ or single kidney harvesting procedures. The characteristics of HTK are its low viscosity, low potassium concentration and low cost. University of Wisconsin solution has been the standard static cold preservation solution for the procurement of liver, kidney, pancreas, and intestine [27]. University of Wisconsin, HTK, and Celsior solutions have provided similar allograft outcomes in most clinical trials, however, some differences have become apparent in recent studies and registry reports [28,29]. Marshall’s hypertonic citrate solution (MHCS) is also suitable for use in the preservation of human kidneys before transplantation [30]. In experimental studies of kidney preservation, HTK and UW retained a greater capacity to preserve endothelial structure and pH buffering function during warm ischaemia in comparison to MHCS and Celsior, especially in uncontrolled DCD donors [31]. In the absence of a cost-utility analysis, the results of the meta-analysis from the randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing UW with Celsior and MHSC in standard cadaver donors, indicate that these cold storage solutions are equivalent [32]. For living donors, in whom immediate kidney transplantation is planned, perfusion with crystalloid solution is sufficient. Kidneys coming from DCD donors, especially those uncontrolled are high-risk marginal organs due to prolonged warm ischaemia periods, and require specific measures in order to diminish the rate of non-function or DGF. More than 60% of kidney grafts currently come from Expanded Criteria Donors (ECD) (any donor aged > 65 years and/or donor aged > 55 years with any of the following: acute renal dysfunction, stroke or arterial hypertension) [33]. Summary of evidenceLEUniversity of Wisconsin and HTK solution are equally effective and are standard for multi-organ or single kidney harvesting procedures.1bA meta-analysis of RCTs indicated that UW and Celsior solution are equivalent in standard cadaver donors.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingUse either University of Wisconsin or histidine tryptophane ketoglutarate preservation solutions for cold storage.StrongUse Celsior or Marshall’s solution for cold storage if University of Wisconsin or histidine tryptophane ketoglutarate solutions are not available.Strong 3.1.2.2. Duration of organ preservation Cold ischaemia time should be as short as possible. Kidneys from ECDs after brain death (DBD) and DCD donors are more sensitive to ischaemia than standard criteria donors. Kidneys from DBD donors should ideally be transplanted within a 18 to 21 hour time period; there is no significant influence on graft survival within a 18 hour CIT [32,34,35]. Kidneys from DCD donors should ideally be transplanted within 12 hours [36], whilst kidneys from expanded criteria donors should ideally be transplanted within 12 to 15 hours [37,38]. 3.1.2.3. Methods of kidney preservation: static and dynamic preservation Whichever method is used, cold storage is critical. The use of cold preservation as a therapeutic window to deliver pharmacological or gene therapy treatments could, from an investigational point of view, improve both short- and long-term graft outcomes [39]. Cooling reduces the metabolic rate of biological tissue minimising continuous cellular processes that lead to depletion of ATP and accumulation of metabolic products. Reperfusion with oxygenated blood invokes ischaemia-reperfusion injury. Hypothermic perfusion does not enable normal cellular metabolic function or prevent depletion of energy stores [40]; however, it prevents the deleterious effects of simple cooling, especially in the setting of prolonged warm-ischaemic time in uncontrolled DCD donors. Two meta-analyses suggest that hypothermic machine perfusion reduces DGF compared with static cold storage [41,42]. Outcomes for primary non-function (PNF) are less clear, but one meta-analysis limited to high quality studies suggests a reduction in PNF rates with hypothermic machine perfusion [42]. A Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis showed that hypothermic machine perfusion (HMP) reduced the risk of DGF when compared to static cold storage (CS) for kidneys from both DCD and DBD donors [43]. The increased demand for organs has led to the increased use of “higher risk” kidney grafts. Kidneys from DCD donors or grafts coming from ECDs are more susceptible to preservation injury and have a higher risk of unfavourable outcomes [44,45]. Dynamic, instead of static, preservation could allow for organ optimisation, offering a platform for viability assessment, active organ repair and resuscitation. Ex situ machine perfusion and in situ regional perfusion in the donor are emerging as potential tools to preserve vulnerable grafts. Preclinical findings have driven clinical organ preservation research that investigates dynamic preservation, in various modes (continuous, pre-implantation) and temperatures (hypo-, sub-, or normothermic) [40]. There are several methods of kidney preservation including: Initial flushing with cold preservation solution followed by ice storage. However, the limitations of static CS in preserving marginal organs such as ECD kidneys has led to the increased use of dynamic methods.Current dynamic preservation strategies entering clinical practice and the different modalities of their use are: hypothermic machine perfusion, hypothermic regional perfusion, normothermic machine perfusion, normothermic regional perfusion, sub-normothermic machine perfusion and sub-normothermic regional perfusion [40].Continuous pulsatile HMP seems to be a good preservation method for marginal organs, either initially or after a period of simple CS (shipping of suboptimal kidneys) [46].Some evidence shows that hypothermic dynamic preservation should be controlled by pressure and not flow, using low pressures to avoid pressure-related injury. The perfusion solutions used are specific, and are qualitatively different to CS solution [29].Nonoxygenated HMP of the kidney at low perfusion pressures (20-30 mmHg) has been shown to reduce DGF [41]. The largest RCT comparing simple CS with HMP of deceased donor kidneys showed an overall reduced risk of DGF and a survival benefit, most pronounced in ECD kidneys [47]. Hypothermic machine perfusion of kidneys from type III DCD donors decreased DGF with no impact on graft survival [44].Hypothermic machine-perfusion reduces the risk of DGF in standard criteria DBD donor kidneys regardless of cold ischaemia time [48].Increased vascular resistance and high perfusate injury marker concentrations are risk factors for DGF; however, they do not justify discarding the kidney. The flow perfusion value seems to be an indicator of graft viability in uncontrolled DCD donors, particularly donors with a high creatinine level [49]. However, research is required to identify a strong and reliable measure for predicting kidney viability from machine perfusion [32]. Perfusion parameters (renal flow and renal vascular resistance) have low predictive values and should not be used as the sole criterion to assess viability of kidney grafts [50].The effect of oxygenated HMP was investigated in an RCT initiated by the Consortium on Organ Preservation in Europe on type III DCD kidneys and ECD kidneys [40]. Graft loss was significantly lower after oxygenated HMP compared to HMP [51]. No significant differences between the two groups were shown for DGF, PNF and patient death. No difference in eGFR at one year was observed between HMPO vs. HMP; however, sensitivity analysis, accounting for all-cause graft failure, showed a higher eGFR in HMPO [51].A short period of normothermic machine perfusion (NMP) immediately prior to implantation has been shown to improve kidney graft function, replenish ATP and reduce injury in experimental models [52,53].A retrospective study of normothermic regional perfusion (NRP) in uncontrolled DCD donors concluded that NRP appears to decrease graft failure when used a preconditioning technique with subsequent HMP preservation in these donors [54].Active research is being developed on preservation of prolonged warm-ischaemically damaged human kidneys (types I and II DCD) by in situ normothermic extracorporal hemoperfusion with oxygenation and leukocyte depletion before procurement [55]. Oxygen carriage is achieved by using blood depleted of leukocytes. Potential advantages of this preservation technique are reduction in ischaemia-reperfusion injury as well as the possibility of assessing organ viability.Currently there is one registered ongoing RCTs on pre-implantation NMP using an oxygenated, sanguineous normothermic perfusion solution (http://www.isrctn.com /ISRCTN15821205). However, kidney function can be evaluated during NMP by assessing macroscopic appearance of blood perfusion, renal blood flow and urine output [56].Continuous subnormothermic machine perfusion and controlled oxygenated rewarming has demonstrated improved creatinine clearance and preservation of structural integrity compared with continuous oxygenated HMP in a research setting [57]. Summary of evidenceLEA meta-analysis of RCTs comparing CS with HMP of deceased donor kidneys showed a reduced risk of DGF for HMP.1aHypothermic dynamic preservation should be controlled by pressure and not flow, using low pressures to avoid pressure-related injury.2aPerfusion parameters (renal flow and renal vascular resistance) have low predictive values and should not be used as the sole criterion to assess viability of kidney grafts.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingMinimise ischaemia times.StrongUse hypothermic machine-perfusion (where available) in deceased donor kidneys to reduce delayed graft function.StrongHypothermic machine-perfusion may be used in standard criteria deceased donor kidneys.StrongUse low pressure values in hypothermic machine perfusion preservation.StrongHypothermic machine-perfusion must be continuous and controlled by pressure and not flow.StrongDo not discard grafts based only on increased vascular resistance and high perfusate injury marker concentrations during hypothermic machine perfusion preservation.Weak 