3.1.11. Immunological complications. Immunological rejection is a common cause of early and late transplant dysfunction [244,360-364]. There is great variation in the timing and severity of rejection episodes and how they respond to treatment. Today two main types of immunological reactions are distinguished, T-cell mediated rejections (TCMR) and antibody-mediated rejections (ABMR) [244,360-362,365]. Antibody-mediated rejection and TCMR may be diagnosed together, called mixed acute rejection. Antibody-mediated rejection may occur as hyperacute rejection (HAR), active rejection or chronic rejection. Chronic ABMR is considered as one of the leading causes of late graft loss. The ultimate standard for the diagnosis of rejection is transplant biopsy [244], because it is impossible to differentiate acute rejection solely on clinical indicators from other causes of renal dysfunction (e.g. acute tubular necrosis, infection, disease recurrence or CNI nephrotoxicity). Therefore, all rejections should be verified by renal biopsy and biopsies should be classified according to the most recent Banff criteria [366], which are the basis for prognosis and treatment [242,360,363]. Renal transplant biopsy should be conducted preferably under US control, using an automated needle biopsy system (e.g. Tru-Cut biopsy gun) [244,360] with a 16 G needle to assure specimen adequacy. The biopsy procedure is considered safe but complications such as bleeding and AV fistulas may occur [244,367,368]. The reported risk of major complications (including substantial bleeding, macroscopic haematuria with ureteric obstruction, peritonitis or graft loss) is approximately 1%. Most important contraindications are anti-coagulant therapy including anti-platelet agents and uncontrolled hypertension. Summary of evidenceLEThere must be routine access to US-guided biopsy of the transplant and sufficient expertise in the hospital pathology department to allow a rapid and clear-cut diagnosis of rejection or other type of allograft dysfunction.2Steroid treatment for rejection may start before the renal biopsy is performed.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingMonitor transplant recipients for signs of acute rejection, particularly during the first six months post-transplant.StrongTake regular blood samples in addition to regular monitoring of urine output and ultrasound examinations in order to detect graft dysfunction during hospitalisation.StrongImmediately rule out other potential causes of graft dysfunction in cases of suspected acute rejection. An ultrasound of the kidney transplant should be performed.StrongPerform a renal biopsy, graded according to the most recent Banff criteria, in patients with suspected acute rejection episodes.StrongOnly if contraindications to renal biopsy are present, can ‘blind’ steroid bolus therapy be given.StrongTest patients who suffer acute rejection as soon as possible for anti-HLA antibodies against the graft.StrongReassess the immunosuppressive therapy of all patients with rejection, including patient adherence to the medication, which is of particular importance in late rejections.Strong 3.1.11.1. Hyper-acute rejection Hyper-acute rejection is the most dramatic and destructive immunological attack on the graft [231,244,360,361]. It results from circulating, complement-fixing IgG antibodies, specifically reactive against incompatible donor antigen, which engages with and destroys the vascular endothelium within minutes or hours after vascularisation. It occurs in ABO-incompatible grafts due to the presence of high titres of pre-existing iso-antibodies against blood group antigens. In ABO-matched grafts, HAR is mediated by anti-donor HLA IgG antibodies. With the development of the cross-match test before transplantation, HAR has become an extremely uncommon complication [231]. Imaging and histology reveals generalised infarction of the graft, which has to be treated by graft nephrectomy. Therefore, prevention is crucial, either by avoidance of high iso-antibodies against incompatible blood group antigens in case of an ABO-incompatible renal transplant and/or by performing a regular cross-match before transplantation (see section 3.1.8). RecommendationStrength ratingPrevent hyper-acute rejection by adequate ABO blood group and human leukocyte antigen matching of donor and recipients.Strong 3.1.11.2. Treatment of T-cell mediated acute rejection As only a few randomised trials have investigated different treatment options for this clinical problem, therapy is mainly based on empirical experience rather than on clinical evidence [244,345,360,369]. Parenteral methylprednisolone (500 mg to 1 g) should be given intravenously as one pulse per day for three days. Anuria or a steep rise in the serum creatinine may indicate steroid-refractory rejection and the need for another three day course of pulsed methylprednisolone therapy [244,360]. In addition, baseline immunosuppression should be optimised to ensure adequate drug exposure [244,360,369]. In severe rejection, a conversion from cyclosporine to tacrolimus and/or from azathioprine to mycophenolate is recommended [244,360]. T-cell depleting biological agents, such as ATG may be given in severe steroid-refractory cases [244,342,345,360,369]. If biological agents are used, other immunological suppression should be adapted and daily T-cell monitoring should be considered to minimise the dose of the biological agent [342]. Before immunosuppression is intensified, especially before the use of T-cell depleting agents, the prognosis of the graft should be critically assessed against the risks of the aggravated immunosuppression. The patient should be counselled adequately. RecommendationsStrength ratingUse steroid bolus therapy as first-line treatment for T-cell mediated rejection in addition to ensuring adequate baseline immunosuppression.StrongIn severe or steroid-resistant rejection, use intensified immunosuppression, high-dose steroid treatment, and eventually T-cell depleting agents.Strong 3.1.11.3. Treatment of antibody mediated rejection (ABMR) Treatment of ABMR relies mainly on retrospective studies and empirical treatment guidelines [370]. Consensus is that it is important to classify the clinical and histological phenotype of the rejection in order to make adequate treatment decisions [370]. Important clinical factors are time of rejection (early acute < 30 days posttransplant vs. late), preformed vs. de novo donor-specific antibodies (DSA), and histology (active vs. chronic rejection). For active ABMR due to pre-existing DSA treatment with a steroid bolus (at least three days of 500 mg/day) in combination with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and plasmapheresis or immune-adsorption is recommended. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) [244,360,371-376] may modulate and/or suppress antibody production. Intravenous immunoglobulin alone seems insufficient for effective treatment and IVIG is used today in a multimodal regimen. Dosages vary widely from 0.2-2.0 g/kg bodyweight, and no comparative studies (e.g. on the dose or optimal concomitant immunosuppression) have been published. Retrospective and prospective case series clearly suggest efficacy of antibody removal using plasmapheresis or immune-adsorption columns [244,360,371-376], although details of the procedures vary widely. Adjunctive therapies such as complement inhibitors, rituximab or splenectomy might be considered in severe early acute cases. Despite controversial data on the utility of anti-CD20 antibody [244,345,360,371-376], rituximab may also be considered as adjunctive therapy in late active ABMR according to expert consensus. Although T-cell depleting agents such as ATG appear to have limited value they are frequently used during mixed acute rejection [241]. However, retrospective series suggests aggravated toxicity, when rituximab is combined with ATG [377], or steroids [345]. Furthermore, many centres will optimise maintenance therapy with mycophenolate and steroids and sufficient tacrolimus trough levels should be achieved [244,360,371-373,376]. Chronic AMR due to pre-existent DSA has no specific treatment recommendations except for optimisation of maintenance therapy and eventually IVIG as an adjunctive treatment with a low level of evidence. In patients presenting with de novo DSA optimisation of maintenance immunosuppression is recommended and non-adherence should be addressed and managed accordingly. If histology shows active ABMR plasmapheresis, rituximab and IVIG can be considered as potential adjunctive agents without good evidence from clinical trials. If biopsy demonstrates pure chronic ABMR no special treatment is recommended due to lack of convincing data, except for IVIG as potential treatment option without firm evidence. Treatment for chronic ABMR appears to be less successful [360,371,373]. In summary, several regimens have proven some efficacy in ABMR. However, except for a beneficial effect of early antibody removal, the lack of firm evidence does not permit evidence-based recommendations for treatment. As a consequence, prevention of ABMR by adequate pre-transplant screening, regular DSA monitoring, avoidance of suboptimal immunosuppression and reinforcement of adherence are crucial [231,360,375,378]. RecommendationStrength ratingTreatment of antibody mediated rejection should include antibody elimination.Strong 