3.1.4. Living and deceased donor implantation surgery. 3.1.4.1. Anaesthetic and peri-operative aspects Good communication between nephrologists, anaesthetists and surgeons is required for optimal anaesthetic and peri-operative care of the renal transplant patient. Anaesthetic care of the living kidney donor [85] and renal transplant recipient [86] have been reviewed and recent guidelines from the European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Transplantation Association (ERA-EDTA) [87] are cross referenced. 3.1.4.2. Immediate pre-op haemodialysis Routine use of haemodialysis immediately prior to renal transplantation is not indicated [87]. Hyperkalaemia is the most common indication for haemodialysis pre-operatively. The risks of haemodialysis compared with medical therapy must be considered along with the risks of intra-operative fluid overload, electrolyte and acid-base disturbances, particularly where a deceased donor kidney is transplanted with a significant risk of DGF. Pre-operative haemodialysis may initiate a pro-inflammatory state, delay surgery, increase the CIT and increase the risk of DGF [88]. Summary of evidenceLEPre-operative haemodialysis has the potential to delay transplantation, increase CIT and increase the risk of DGF.2 RecommendationStrength ratingUse dialysis or conservative measures to manage fluid and electrolyte imbalance prior to transplant surgery taking into consideration the likelihood of immediate graft function.Weak 3.1.4.3. Operating on patients taking anti-platelet and anti-coagulation agents Many patients active on the transplant waiting list have vascular disease and/or a pro-thrombotic condition that should be risk-assessed prior to transplantation. Dual anti-platelet therapy is commonly given to patients with coronary artery stents for six to twelve months; peri-operative management plans for these patients should be discussed with a cardiologist so that the risks of withdrawal of the anti-platelet agent can be fully considered. Options for reversal of anti-coagulation and post-operative anti-coagulation should be discussed with a haematologist prior to patient listing. Some patients will be active on a transplant waiting list whilst continuing to take anti-platelet and/or anti-coagulation agents. The indication for anti-platelet or anti-coagulation agents should be clearly documented for each individual. Potential increased risk of peri-operative bleeding needs to be weighed against potential harm from arterial or venous thrombosis. In accordance with the American College of Chest Physicians and the European Society of Cardiology guidelines [89,90], the literature suggests that continuing anti-platelet therapy with aspirin, ticlopidine or clopidogrel does not confer a significantly greater risk of peri/post-operative complications [91], however, the number of patients studied was low. If needed, the effect of anti-platelet agents can be reduced with intra-operative platelet infusions. Summary of evidenceLEA retrospective single-centre case-control study in patients undergoing kidney transplantation concluded that continuing anti-platelet therapy with aspirin, ticlopidine or clopidogrel does not confer a significantly greater risk of peri/post-operative complications.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingConsider continuing anti-platelet therapy in patients on the transplant waiting list.WeakDiscuss patients who take anti-platelet and anti-coagulation agents prior to transplant surgery with relevant cardiologist/haematologist/nephrologist.Weak 3.1.4.4. What measures should be taken to prevent venous thrombosis including deep vein thrombosis during and after renal transplant? Peri-operative administration of short-acting anti-coagulation agents reduces peri-operative risk of venous thrombosis (including in ileo-femoral and renal veins); however, due to associated increased blood loss administration requires knowledge of individual patient risk factors. None of the current major thrombosis prevention guidelines directly address thromboprophylaxis in the renal transplant peri-operative period. A small RCT [92] showed no difference in early post-operative graft loss or thromboembolic complications with or without prophylactic anti-coagulation. Those administered prophylactic anti-coagulation had significantly lower haemoglobin whilst those administered prophylactic unfractionated heparin had prolonged lymph drainage. Based on this study, routine pharmacological prophylaxis is not recommended in low-risk living donor recipients. Mechanical measures to decrease ileo-femoral deep vein thrombosis (DVT) can be used where there is no contraindication due to peripheral vascular disease particularly where there are concerns about bleeding risks with pharmacological prophylaxis. Summary of evidenceLEA small RCT (n=75) showed no difference in early post-operative graft loss or thromboembolic complications with or without prophylactic anti-coagulation.1b RecommendationStrength ratingDo not routinely give post-operative prophylactic unfractionated or low-molecular-weight heparin to low-risk living donor transplant recipients.Weak 3.1.4.5. Is there a role for peri-operative antibiotics in renal transplantation? Prophylactic peri-operative antibiotics are generally used in renal transplant surgery but the optimal antibiotic regimen is not known and increasing antibiotic resistance may hamper their effectiveness in this setting. A multicentre, prospective RCT showed no difference at one month in surgical site, bacterial, fungal or viral infection between those receiving a single dose broad spectrum antibiotic at induction of anaesthesia compared to those receiving antibiotic 12 hourly for three to five days [93]. A retrospective comparison of peri-operative intravenous cefazolin prophylaxis compared to no antibiotic showed no difference in infectious complications (surgical site, urinary tract, bacteraemia or central catheter-related infection) in the first month after renal transplantation [94]. Summary of evidenceLEA multicentre, prospective RCT showed that the incidents of surgical site infection and urinary tract infection were similar in those receiving a single dose broad spectrum antibiotic at induction of anaesthesia and those receiving antibiotic 12 hourly for three to five days.1b RecommendationStrength ratingUse single-dose, rather than multi-dose, peri-operative prophylactic antibiotics in routine renal transplant recipients.Strong 3.1.4.6. Is there a role for specific fluid regimes during renal transplantation and central venous pressure measurement in kidney transplant recipients? Careful peri- and post-operative fluid balance is essential for optimal renal graft function. There is no evidence determining if crystalloids or colloids are better for intravenous fluid management during renal transplant surgery, however colloids may be immunogenic. If normal saline (0.9%) is used, monitoring for metabolic acidosis is recommended in the peri-operative period. A prospective double-blind RCT compared normal saline to lactated Ringer’s solution as intra-operative intravenous fluid therapy. Serum creatinine at day three post-surgery did not differ between the two groups. However, Ringer’s lactate caused less hyperkalaemia and metabolic acidosis than normal saline. Balanced solutions may be the optimal and safer option for intraoperative intravenous fluid therapy [95]. Central venous pressure (CVP) measurement helps anaesthetists guide fluid management. A small prospective non-blinded RCT compared two normal (0.9%) saline regimens: constant infusion (10-12 mL/kg-1/h-1 from start of surgery until reperfusion) and central venous pressure-based infusion (target CVP appropriate to stage of operation) [96]. Central venous pressure directed infusion produced a more stable haemodynamic profile, better diuresis and early graft function. Directed hydration may decrease DGF rates and CVP measurement may help optimise early graft function. Summary of evidenceLEA small (n=51) prospective RCT found that use of Ringer’s lactate solution was associated with less hyperkalaemia and acidosis compared with normal saline in patients undergoing kidney transplantation.1bA small (n=40) prospective RCT comparing constant infusion vs. CVP found that CVP produced a more stable haemodynamic profile, better diuresis and early graft function.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingOptimise pre-, peri- and post-operative hydration to improve renal graft function.StrongUse balanced crystalloid solutions for intra-operative intravenous fluid therapy.WeakUse target directed intra-operative hydration to decrease delayed graft function rates and optimise early graft function.Strong 3.1.4.7. Is there a role for dopaminergic drugs, furosemide or mannitol in renal transplantation? Low-dose dopamine (LDD) has been used in renal transplantation due to a perceived improvement in urine output and early graft function. Use of LDD in kidney donors is outside of the scope of this section. Conflicting results prevent a consensus statement on routine use of LDD in transplant recipients. A small (n=20) prospective randomised cross-over study in deceased donor renal transplantation suggested significant improvements in urine output and creatinine clearance in the first nine hours post-surgery without adverse events [97]. By contrast, a retrospective comparison of LDD in the first twelve hours post-deceased donor renal transplantation showed no difference in diuresis or kidney function but those administered LDD (n=57) had increased heart rates, longer intensive therapy unit stay and higher six-month mortality than those not treated with LDD (n=48) [98]. Considerable variation exists in the use of diuretics during renal transplant recipient surgery and there is little evidence to suggest any benefit from their use [99]. No evidence on the use of mannitol during renal transplant recipient surgery was found during the panel’s literature search. Use of mannitol in kidney donors is outside the scope of this section. Summary of evidenceLEA retrospective comparative study of LDD treated vs. non-treated renal transplantation patients concluded that LDD administration did not improve kidney function in the first twelve hours post renal transplantation, but did result in increased heart rates, longer intensive therapy unit stay and higher six-month mortality in those receiving LDD.2b RecommendationStrength ratingDo not routinely use low-dose dopaminergic agents in the early post-operative period.Weak 