3.1.9. Matching of donors and recipients. Histocompatibility antigens show remarkable polymorphism and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) matching is still very important in kidney transplantation as transplant outcome correlates with the number of HLA mismatches [231-234]. Human leukocyte antigen incompatibility can result in proliferation and activation of the recipient’s CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells with concomitant activation of B-cell allo-antibody production. This may lead to cellular and humoral graft rejection. Matching should concentrate on HLA antigens, which impact outcome. Human leukocyte antigens A, B, C as well as DR must be determined in all potential recipients and donors according to current guidelines and national allocation rules [231-236]. Additionally, it is recommended to determine HLA-DQ antigens of donor and recipient. Furthermore, HLA-DP antigen characterisation may be performed, especially for sensitised recipients [231-236]. All patients registered for renal transplantation must have their serum screened for anti-HLA antibodies, which are particularly common after pregnancy, previous transplant, transplant rejection, and blood transfusions [231-236]. Thorough pre-transplant testing for HLA antibodies must be performed according to current recommendations [231-236]. Sera from potential organ recipients should be screened for HLA-specific antibodies every three months or as stipulated by the national and/or international organ exchange organisations [231-236]. In addition, screening for HLA-specific antibodies should be carried out at two and four weeks after every immunising event, e.g. blood transfusion, transplantation, pregnancy, and graft explantation [231-236]. Highly sensitised patients should have prioritised access to special allocation programmes [233,234,236], such as the acceptable mismatch (AM) programme of Eurotransplant [237]. A careful analysis of HLA antibody specificities must be carried out to avoid unacceptable HLA antigens and to determine acceptable HLA antigens in potential donors, who are expected to give a negative cross-match result. The definition of unacceptable HLA antigens should be implemented according to local allocation rules and international recommendations [231-235,238]. The information on unacceptable HLA antigens should be highlighted with the patient’s details in the database of the national kidney-sharing programme, preventing the unnecessary transport of kidneys to recipients with high antibody sensitivity. To avoid hyper-acute rejection (HAR), adequate (e.g. CDC, virtual) cross-match tests must be performed before each kidney and combined kidney/pancreas transplantation in accordance with national and international recommendations [231-234,236]. Laboratories which provide HLA-testing, HLA antibody testing and cross-matching for transplant centres must have valid accreditation to ensure accuracy and reliability [225,226,231-233]. They must follow the standards of national and international organisations, such as the European Federation for Immunogenetics [236]. Previously, compatibility for ABO blood group antigens and HLA antigens was of critical importance in kidney transplantation. This may change in the future, e.g. in the new U.S. allocation system A2 and A2B donors are transplanted into B recipients [234]. To avoid an increasing imbalance between demand and supply in deceased donor kidney transplantation in O recipients, ABO identity is demanded by several organ allocation organisations with a few exceptions, e.g. as in zero HLA-A+B+DR-mismatch kidneys [234,235]. With the introduction of antibody elimination methods, potent immunosuppression and novel agents (e.g. anti B-cell drugs), successful ABO-incompatible living donor transplantations, with good long-term outcomes are possible [239,240]. However, higher costs and infection rates have been described. Even the barrier of a positive cross-match due to preformed HLA antibodies is under discussion with newer “desensitisation” techniques available in cases with available living donors [241,242]. Success rates are lower, antibody-mediated rejections are frequent, but survival may be better compared to waiting list survival on dialysis. While this is a rapidly evolving field, further research is needed to define standard protocols. Until then such “desensitisation” protocols are experimental and patients undergoing “desensitisation” should be treated in specialised centres, where outcomes are documented. Patients should be informed adequately of the risks and limitations and alternative strategies (e.g. acceptable mismatch programmes, cross-over transplantation and donor chains) should be discussed. Summary of evidenceLEHuman leukocyte antigen matching is very important in kidney transplantation as transplant outcome correlates with the number of HLA mismatches. Matching should concentrate on HLA antigens, which impact outcome.3In accordance with national and international recommendations adequate (e.g. CDC, virtual) cross-match tests must be performed before each kidney and combined kidney/pancreas transplantation to avoid hyper-acute rejection.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingDetermine the ABO blood group and the human leukocyte antigen A, B, C and DR phenotypes for all candidates awaiting kidney transplantation.StrongTest both the donor and recipient for human leukocyte antigen DQ. Human leukocyte antigen DP testing may be performed for sensitised patients.StrongPerform thorough testing for HLA antibodies before transplantation.StrongPerform adequate cross-match tests to avoid hyper-acute rejection, before each kidney and combined kidney/pancreas transplantation.Strong 