3.1.1. Living-donor nephrectomy. The endoscopic (laparoscopic) approach is the preferred technique for living-donor nephrectomy in established kidney transplant programmes [3]. Nevertheless, open surgery, preferably by a mini-incision approach, can still be considered a valid option, despite increased pain in the post-operative period [4]. Endoscopic living-donor nephrectomy (ELDN) includes: Pure or hand-assisted transperitoneal laparoscopy;Pure or hand-assisted retroperitoneal approach;Laparo-Endoscopic Single Site Surgery (LESS);Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery-assisted (NOTES);Laparo-Endoscopic Single Site Surgery and robotic-assisted transperitoneal or retroperitoneal approach. There is strong evidence in support of laparoscopic living-donor nephrectomy (LLDN), including several systematic reviews and meta-analysis, which have compared its safety and efficacy to open donor nephrectomy. Laparoscopic living-donor nephrectomy is associated with similar rates of graft function and rejection, urological complications and patient and graft survival. However, measures related to analgesic requirements, pain, hospital stay, and time to return to work are significantly better for laparoscopic procedures [5-8]. Standard LLDN is usually done through 5 and 12 mm ports, but has also been done with 3 or 3.5 mm ports [9]. According to a recent meta-analysis, hand-assisted LLDN is associated with shorter operative time and warm ischaemia, but equivalent safety and overall results [10]. Laparoscopic living-donor nephrectomy can also be performed with robotic assistance, with equivalent results according to a systematic review [11]. However, the numbers are still low and recent studies, including a meta-analysis, have reported higher complication rates for this approach [12,13]. Laparo-endoscopic single site surgery nephrectomy allows the surgeon to work through a single incision (usually the umbilicus) with a multi-entry port. The same or a separate incision is then used for kidney withdrawal. Several retrospective and at least three prospective randomised trials demonstrated equivalent safety and results, with a trend towards less pain and better cosmetic results [14,15]. However, LESS is considered a more technically demanding procedure when compared with classic LLDN and its role is yet to be defined. Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery-assisted transvaginal nephrectomy avoids the abdominal incision needed for kidney extraction, aimed at minimising scaring and pain. Initial reports suggest that this approach is safe, however experience with this technique is still highly limited [16]. Right LLDN has been considered more difficult, yielding inferior results. However, both left and right LLDN can be performed with equivalent safety and efficacy according to large retrospective studies, systematic reviews and meta-analysis [17,18]. Laparoscopic living-donor nephrectomy has brought attention to potential failures of different devices such as, endoscopic staplers and locking and non-locking clips, used to secure the renal hilum [17]. There is no scientific evidence that one device is safer than another for securing the renal artery [19-21]. However, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the manufacturers of locking clips have issued a contraindication against their use in securing the artery during LLDN. Summary of evidenceLELaparoscopic living-donor nephrectomy is associated with similar rates of graft function and rejection, urological complications and patient and graft survival to open nephrectomy.1aMeasures related to analgesic requirements, pain, hospital stay, and time to return to work are significantly better for laparoscopic procedures.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer pure or hand-assisted laparoscopic/retroperitoneoscopic surgery as the preferential technique for living-donor nephrectomy.StrongPerform open living-donor nephrectomy in centres where endoscopic techniques are not implemented.StrongPerform laparo-endoscopic single site surgery, robotic and natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery-assisted living-donor nephrectomy in highly-specialised centres only.Strong 