3.1.3. Donor Kidney biopsies. Donor kidney biopsies can serve different purposes including: histological assessment of organ quality prior to transplantation (often referred to as procurement or harvest biopsies);histological analysis of focal lesions, especially if there is a suspicion of neoplasia;detection of donor derived lesions as reference for subsequent post-transplant biopsies (often referred to as baseline, zero-time or implantation biopsies). 3.1.3.1. Procurement Biopsies 3.1.3.1.1 Background and prognostic value  Procurement biopsies are used for the detection of tissue injury to aid the decision of whether or not a deceased donor kidney is suitable for transplantation. These biopsies are most commonly performed in donors with clinical suspicion of chronic kidney injury (ECDs) [58]. Kidney discard in Europe is rarely based on histology findings [59], as procurement biopsies are not regularly performed for graft allocation in the Eurotransplant region [58]. However, since biopsy findings are the most frequent cause for discarding donor organs in the United States [60-63], their prognostic value has been analysed in numerous studies. A recently published systematic review of studies on donor kidney biopsies revealed a lack of prospective studies and marked heterogeneity regarding the type of lesions being assessed, their scoring, the definitions of post-transplant outcomes and the statistical methods employed [64]. Therefore, the published evidence suggests that the use of procurement biopsies for deciding on suitability for transplantation of donor kidneys may have some important limitations including the following [58,64,65]: There is no consistent association between histological lesions observed in donor kidney biopsies and post-transplant outcomes. The concept of procurement biopsies in elderly donors was introduced by a study from Gaber et al., in 1995. This study observed significantly worse outcomes in recipients of kidneys with > 20% globally sclerotic glomeruli [66]. However, subsequent studies yielded highly variable results and it cannot be concluded that glomerulosclerosis is independently associated with graft outcomes [64]. A similar variability was also observed for other potentially relevant lesions like arterial injury, interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy with each showing predictive value in some studies, but not in others [64]. There is no agreement on prognostically relevant lesions and how they should be scored. Specific grading systems for donor kidney biopsies have not yet been developed. Lesion scoring in pre-transplant biopsies is mostly based on the Banff consensus for post-transplant renal allograft pathology, which is supported by the 2007 Banff Conference report [67]. Many attempts have been made to use composite semi-quantitative scoring systems to express the global extent of tissue injury in donor kidney biopsies. These scoring systems are mostly based on simple addition of the Banff scores for individual lesions, most commonly glomerulosclerosis, arteriolar hyalinosis, arterial intimal fibrosis, interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy and rarely include clinical parameters like donor age [68], serum creatinine values and donor hypertension [69]. A limited number of histological scoring systems are based on modelling analysis [68-72]. Only the Maryland Aggregate Pathology Index (MAPI) [72] scoring system and the Leuven donor risk score [68], use graft failure as their endpoint and have been independently validated in a second cohort. Other studies used surrogate clinical endpoints like DGF [70] and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) at three months [71] to calculate histological models. In addition, these models were not validated in independent cohorts. The variation in how the components are weighted to achieve the composite score and the different endpoints used may explain the conflicting conclusions in the literature [58,64,65]. Due to the time constraints of organ allocation procurement biopsies are mostly read on frozen sections by on-call pathologists, which might affect the diagnostic reliability of reported findings. This may have substantial impact on the diagnostic reliability of the procedure since frozen sections are prone to morphological artefacts that can impair the detection and scoring of potentially important lesions such as arteriolar hyalinosis and interstitial fibrosis [73,74]. There is strong evidence that dedicated renal pathologists should examine formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded core-needle biopsies. Paraffin histology employing special stains is technically superior to frozen sections since morphological details are better preserved on paraffin sections than on frozen sections and potentially confounding artefacts can be avoided. Rapid processing of tissue for paraffin histology is technically feasible, but the respective protocols are not universally implemented and are not available on a 24/7 basis in most departments. Another source of variability is the professional experience of the pathologist in charge [75]. Procurement biopsies are commonly read by the on-call general pathologist who frequently has no specific training in renal pathology. A recent study specifically addressing this issue found that the on-call pathologists tended to overestimate chronic injury in biopsies [76]. 3.1.3.2. Type and size of biopsy Many transplant centres obtain wedge biopsies of donor kidneys rather than needle biopsies due to the presumed higher risk of bleeding complications with the latter. Wedge biopsies sample the cortex superficially whereas needle biopsies reach deeper aspects of the cortex. Needle biopsies also allow sampling from different areas of the kidney. Submit 14 or 16 G needle biopsies as obtaining adequate biopsies with 18 G needles requires multiple cores [77]. Several studies comparing wedge with needle biopsies concluded that needle biopsies perform much better in the evaluation of vascular lesions because interlobular arteries are rarely sampled in wedge biopsies. Both methods were comparable for glomerular or tubulointerstitial lesions [78-81]. It was also demonstrated that glomerulosclerosis is significantly more pronounced in the subcapsular zone compared with deeper areas of the cortex [82]. The problem of insufficient sampling of arteries and over representation of (subcapsular) glomerular scars in wedge biopsies, can only be avoided if particular attention is paid to the correct performance of the biopsy, with a minimal depth of 5 mm [83]. The predictive value of glomerulosclerosis increases significantly with higher numbers of glomeruli in the wedge biopsy, with ideally at least 25 glomeruli required for evaluation [80]. There is limited evidence regarding complication rates in pre-implantation biopsies. For surgeons who are reluctant to take needle biopsies, the use of a skin punch biopsy device might be an attractive alternative. Skin punch biopsies measure 3 mm in diameter. They have a shorter length than needle biopsies therefore avoiding injury to large calibre arteries at the corticomedullary junction whilst still sampling tissue from deeper areas of the cortex [84]. 3.1.3.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations Summary of evidenceLEIndividual histologic lesions like glomerulosclerosis, arterial luminal narrowing or tubulointerstitial injury observed in donor kidney biopsies have limited prognostic value for long-term allograft survival.3Composite histological scoring systems provide a more comprehensive measure of overall organ damage. However, published scoring systems still lack independent validation and robust thresholds.3Size of the biopsy is of critical importance for its diagnostic value. An adequate biopsy reaches beyond the immediate subcapsular area (≥ 5 mm) and contains ≥ 25 glomeruli and ≥ one artery. Needle biopsies, wedge biopsies or specimens obtained with a skin punch biopsy device will result in equally adequate biopsies if sampling is properly performed. Obtaining adequate biopsies with 18 G needles is difficult and requires multiple cores.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not base decisions on the acceptance of a donor organ on histological findings alone, since this might lead to an unnecessary high rate of discarded grafts. Interpret histology in context with clinical parameters of donor and recipient including perfusion parameters where available.StrongUse paraffin histology for histomorphology as it is superior to frozen sections; however, its diagnostic value has to be balanced against a potential delay of transplantation.StrongSubmit 14 or 16 G needle core biopsies, wedge biopsies or skin punch biopsies for histopathology.WeakProcurement biopsies should be read by a renal pathologist or a general pathologist with specific training in kidney pathology.Strong 3.1.3.4. Implantation biopsies Implantation biopsies are used to provide baseline information on donor kidney injury for comparison with subsequent post-transplant kidney biopsies. Baseline biopsies can be essential for clear distinction between pre-existing damage and acquired lesions. They are particularly valuable in cases of thrombotic microangiopathy, arteriolar hyalinosis or acute tubular injury. In contrast to procurement biopsies that are obtained at the time of organ harvesting, implantation biopsies are usually taken before implantation in order to cover potential effects of cold ischaemia time. Their diagnostic contribution has not been formally quantified in the literature which might be due to the difficulties of measuring the value of implantation biopsies for improving diagnoses. Despite the lack of formal studies investigating their value it seems very reasonable to perform implantation biopsies in deceased donor kidneys. 