3.1.12. Follow-up after transplantation. Long-term graft function is of critical importance for the success of a transplant [244,245]. Therefore, regular long-term follow-up by experienced transplant physicians is essential in order to detect complications or graft dysfunction early and reassure adherence to the immunosuppressive regimen. Complications of immunosuppression occur frequently including specific complications of the different drugs as well as over immunosuppression (namely opportunistic infections and malignancy) [244,245]. The risk of cancer and cardiac disease is several-fold higher in transplanted patients than in the general population. Cancer is a cause of significant morbidity and mortality in the transplanted population [244,379,380]. Cardiovascular disease is the most frequent cause of death in renal allograft recipients [244,381,382]. Other important long-term problems are non-adherence [383], the development of anti-HLA antibodies, recurrence of the original disease and CNI associated nephrotoxicity [244,245]. 3.1.12.1. Chronic allograft dysfunction/interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy Many patients lose their grafts due to chronic allograft dysfunction [244,245,384]. Histology will usually reveal a chronic process of interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (IF/TA) [385]. Some patients will have immunological chronic ABMR [386], as discussed in section 3.1.11.3. Interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy takes months or years to develop and is heralded by proteinuria and hypertension, with a simultaneous or delayed rise in serum creatinine level over months [244,384,385]. It is likely that IF/TA is more common in patients who have had early attacks of acute rejection or infection. The main differential diagnosis is chronic nephrotoxicity [387], which is common in patients receiving CNIs, and pre-existing and/or aggravated chronic kidney damage from a marginal donor kidney [244,384,385]. Diagnosis is by renal biopsy [244,384]. In patients diagnosed early, particularly if there is evidence for CNI toxicity, disease progression may be slowed by conversion to a CNI-free regimen [201-203,263,264]. Conversion to m-TOR inhibitors is an option for patients without significant proteinuria (< 800 mg/day), but moderate renal function [243-245]. Alternatively, successful conversion to a mycophenolate based regimen has been described, especially in patients beyond the first three years post-transplant [243,245,280]. If there is intolerance to m-TOR inhibitors or MPA, conversion to belatacept or an azathioprine-based regimen may be successful, though the higher risk of rejection warrants close surveillance [359]. If the risk of rejection seems too high, another option is substantial reduction of CNI under the protection of MPA [245,280]. In patients with proteinuria, intervention with an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, or angiotensin II receptor blocker [244,384] together with tight blood pressure control may slow down renal progression. Other supportive measures include the treatment of hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes, anaemia, acidosis, and bone disease [244]. However, ultimately, the patient will require another transplant (if fit enough to go on the transplant waiting list) or dialysis therapy. Summary of evidenceLERegular long-term follow-up by experienced transplant physicians is essential in order to detect complications or graft dysfunction early and reassure adherence to the immunosuppressive regimen.4Annual screening should include a dermatological examination, cardiovascular history and exam, tumour screening (including a nodal examination, faecal occult screening, chest x-ray, gynaecological and urological examination), and an abdominal US, including US of the native and transplanted kidney. If appropriate, further diagnostic tests should be prompted to treat or slow down the progression of any identified complication.4In patients diagnosed early with IF/TA, particularly if there is evidence for CNI toxicity, disease progression may be slowed by conversion to a CNI-free regimen. If the risk of rejection seems too high, another option is substantial reduction of CNI under the protection of MPA.1Supportive measures should aim to adequately treat the consequences of chronic kidney disease (e.g. anaemia, acidosis, bone disease).4 RecommendationsStrength ratingProvide lifelong regular post-transplant follow-up by an experienced and trained transplant specialist at least every six to twelve months.StrongAdvise patients on appropriate lifestyle changes, potential complications, and the importance of adherence to their immunosuppressive regimen.StrongRegularly monitor (approximately every four to eight weeks) serum creatinine, estimated glomerular filtration rate, blood pressure, urinary protein excretion, immunosuppression and complications after renal transplantation. Changes in these parameters over time should trigger further diagnostic work-up including renal biopsy, a search for infectious causes and anti-HLA antibodies.StrongPerform an ultrasound of the graft, in case of graft dysfunction, to rule out obstruction and renal artery stenosis.StrongIn patients with interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy undergoing calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) therapy and/or with histological signs suggestive for CNI toxicity (e.g. arteriolar hyalinosis, striped fibrosis) consider CNI reduction or withdrawal.StrongInitiate appropriate medical treatment, e.g. tight control of hypertension, diabetes, proteinuria, cardiac risk factors, infections, and other complications according to current guidelines.Strong 