6.2.1.2.4. Active surveillance management. Based on the DETECTIVE consensus study, the surveillance strategy should be based on serial DRE (at least once yearly), PSA (at least once, every six months) and repeated biopsy. It was also agreed that PSA progression or change in PSA kinetics alone should lead to reclassification only if accompanied by changes in histology on repeat biopsy [330]. The Movember consensus group stated that patients suitable for AS who suffer, or are at risk of, significant psychological distress should be offered more support, rather than active treatment. Furthermore, they made a number of recommendations that in some ways differ from the DETECTIVE consensus study, e.g. that routine DRE was not supported if MRI or other imaging was carried out routinely during AS, that if MRI and other parameters (PSA kinetics and density) are stable routine biopsy may be omitted and that change in clinical parameters should prompt MRI with possible biopsy rather than immediate biopsy [494]. The somewhat contradicting recommendations, made by these two different international consensus groups so close in time, clearly illustrate the lack of high-level evidence on how the strategy of AS should be planned and the urgent need of prospective randomised trials. In 2016, the Prostate Cancer Radiological Estimation of Change in Sequential Evaluation (PRECISE) criteria were established to standardise the assessment of tumour progression on serial MRI [507]. Progression on MRI, or not, as defined by PRECISE criteria, is a strong predictor of histological upgrading [508,509]. Two independent meta-analyses assessed the value of MRI progression criteria for predicting histological progression (mostly defined as progression to ISUP grade group ≥ 2). The pooled histological progression rate was 27% in both reviews. If biopsies were triggered only by MRI progression findings, approximately two thirds of the biopsies would be avoided, at the cost of missing 40% of men with histological progression. In addition, at least half of biopsied men would have had negative findings for histological progression and thus would have undergone unnecessary biopsies. If histological progression was restricted to progression to ISUP grade group > 3, approximately 30% of histological progression would be missed and approximately 80% of the biopsies performed would be unnecessary. The use of the PRECISE criteria did not seem to change these results [510,511]. This supports maintaining protocol-mandated repeat biopsies during the course of AS. Thus, the basis for AS protocols includes standard repeat biopsy. However, several factors have been found to be associated with low re-classification rates and long PFS: negative baseline or repeat MRI during AS [505,512-518], low PSA-D [505,513,515,518], low PSA velocity (PSAV) [519,520] or negative biopsy (i.e., no cancer at all) at confirmatory or repeat biopsy during AS [521]. Patients with stable (PRECISE 3) on repeat MRI during AS and a low PSA-D (<0.15) have a very low rate of progression and repeat biopsy may therefore be omitted [522]. A Panel SR incorporating 263 surveillance protocols showed that 78.7% of protocols mandated per-protocol confirmatory biopsies within the first two years and that 57.7% of the protocols performed repeat biopsy at least every three years for ten years after the start of AS [491]. In another review it was concluded that a negative repeat biopsy during AS was associated with a 50% decrease in the risk of future reclassification and upgrading [523]. In a single-centre AS cohort of 514 patients who underwent at least three protocol-mandated biopsies after diagnosis (the confirmatory biopsy and at least two additional surveillance biopsies), men with one negative biopsy (i.e., no cancer at all) at confirmatory or second biopsy, or men with two consecutive negative biopsies had a lower likelihood of a positive third biopsy and significantly better 10-year treatment free survival [521]. This suggests that men with repetitive negative biopsies may pursue AS with at least less frequent untriggered biopsies. 