6.2.1.2. Active surveillance. Active surveillance aims to delay or completely avoid unnecessary treatment, and consequently unnecessary side effects, in men with clinically localised PCa, and a life expectancy of ten years or more, who do not require immediate treatment, but at the same time achieve the correct timing for curative treatment in those who eventually do [486]. Patients remain under close surveillance through structured surveillance programmes with regular follow-up consisting of PSA testing, clinical examination, MRI imaging and repeat prostate biopsies, with curative treatment being prompted by pre-defined thresholds indicative of development to potentially significant disease, which is still curable, while considering individual life expectancy. No formal RCT is available comparing AS to curative treatment. Several cohorts have investigated AS in organ-confined disease, the findings of which were summarised in a SR [487]. A largest prospective series of men with low-risk PCa managed by AS was published [488]. Table 6.1.2 summarises the results of selective AS cohorts. It is clear that the long-term OS and CSS of patients on AS are extremely good. However, more than one-third of patients are ‘reclassified’ during follow-up, most of whom undergo curative treatment due to disease upgrading, increase in disease extent, disease stage, progression, or patient preference. There is considerable variation and heterogeneity between studies regarding patient selection and eligibility, follow-up policies (including frequency and type of imaging such as MRI imaging, type and frequency of repeat prostate biopsies, such as MRI-targeted biopsies or transperineal template biopsies, use of PSA kinetics and density, and frequency of clinical follow-up), when active treatment should be instigated (i.e., reclassification criteria) and which outcome measures should be prioritised [486]. For specific guidelines on inclusion criteria and follow-up strategies for AS, see Sections 6.2.1.2. In the ProtecT RCT, 1,643 patients were randomised into one of three arms: active treatment with either RP or EBRT or AM with outcomes reported at ten years and 15 years [474,489]. Even though the ProtecT trial is a RCT it is not, strictly speaking, a study comparing AS to active treatment as it does not include a formal AS strategy as described above and in Sections 6.2.1.2. Active monitoring (AM), as used in the study, was a significantly less stringent surveillance strategy in terms of clinical follow-up, using PSA only, with relaxed criteria to define progression. No imaging and repeat biopsies were performed as in AS. At enrolment fifty-six percent of the patients had low-risk disease, with 90% having a PSA < 10 ng/mL, 77% ISUP grade group 1 (20% ISUP grade group 2–3), and 76% had T1c disease. The remaining patients had mainly intermediate-risk disease. The key finding was that AM was as effective as active treatment at 15 years (CSS = 96.9% in the AM-group vs. 97.8% in the RP-group and 97.1% in the EBRT-group, p=0.53), but at a cost of increased metastatic progression risk (9.4% vs. 4.7% and 5.0% respectively), as well as clinical progression at 15 years (25.9% for AM vs. 10.7% for RP/RT). Death from any cause occurred in 21.7% of the cohort, with similar numbers across treatment groups. Metastases, although rare, were more frequent than seen with comparable AS protocols [487]. A comprehensive characterisation of the ProtecT study cohort was performed after ten years, stratifying patients at baseline according to risk of progression using clinical stage, grade at diagnosis and PSA level [490]. Additionally, detailed clinico-pathological information on participants who received RP were analysed. The 15-year paper reported updated contemporary risk-stratification according to D’Amico (24.1% Intermediate risk, 9.6% high risk), CAPRA (26.4% Score 3-5, 2.5% Score 6-10) and Cambridge Prognostic Group (20.5% Group 2, 8.8% Groups 3-5). Among patients who underwent prostatectomy, 50.5% were ISUP grade group ≥2, while 28.5% had an increase in pathological stage and 32% had an increase in tumour grade. Additionally, 51% of patients who developed metastases displayed ISUP grade group 1 and 47.6% were low CAPRA risk. Over time, 61.1% of patients in the AM group received radical treatment (from 54.8% at ten years). From the ten year report the authors aimed identify prognostic markers. The results showed that treatment received, age (65–69 vs. 50–64 years), PSA, ISUP grade group at diagnosis, cT stage, risk group, number of PCa-involved biopsy cores, maximum length of tumour (median 5.0 vs. 3.0 mm), aggregate length of tumour (median 8.0 vs. 4.0 mm), and presence of perineural invasion were each associated with increased risk of disease progression (p < 0.001 for each). However, these factors could not reliably predict progression in individuals. Notably, 53% (n = 105) of patients who progressed had biopsy ISUP grade group 1 disease, although, conversely, none of the participants who received RP and subsequently progressed had pathological ISUP grade group 1 tumours. This discrepancy in progression and metastases rate between the AM arm of the ProtecT study and comparable AS protocols can, most likely, be explained by inadequate sampling by PSA testing and 10-core TRUS-guided biopsies and differences in intensity of surveillance. It is important to note that the AM arm in ProtecT represented an intermediate approach between contemporary AS protocols and WW in terms of a monitoring strategy based almost entirely on PSA measurements alone; there was no use of MRI scan, either at recruitment or during the monitoring period, nor were there any protocol-mandated repeat prostate biopsies at regular intervals. In addition, approximately 40% of randomised patients had intermediate-risk disease (both ISUP grade group 2 and 3). Nevertheless, the ProtecT study has reinforced the role of deferred active treatment (i.e., either AS or some form of initial AM) as a feasible alternative to active curative interventions in all patients with low-grade and low-stage disease, as well as for many patients with favourable intermediate risk disease. Beyond 15 years, no RCT-data are available, as yet, although AS is likely to give more reassurance especially in younger men, based on more accurate risk stratification at recruitment and more stringent criteria regarding follow-up, imaging, repeat biopsy and reclassification. Individual life expectancy must continuously be evaluated before considering any active treatment in low-risk patients and in those with up to ten to 15 years’ individual life expectancy [490]. 