3.4.9. Specific stone management of ureteral stones. 3.4.9.1. Conservative treatment/observation There are only limited data regarding spontaneous stone passage according to stone size [333,334]. Spontaneous stone passage was reported for 49-52% of upper ureteral stones, 58-70% of mid ureteral stones and 68-83% of distal ureteral stones. Considering stone size almost 75% of stones < 5 mm and 62% of stones ≥ 5 mm passed spontaneously, with an average time to stone expulsion about 17 days (range 6-29 days) [333,335]. Considering both size and location, stones of <5 mm in the distal ureteral have a 89% chance of spontaneous passage, while 71% of stones <5 mm located in the upper ureter still pass spontaneously [333]. The Panel is aware of the fact that spontaneous stone expulsion decreases with increasing stone size and that there are differences between individual patients. 3.4.9.2. Pharmacological treatment, medical expulsive therapy Medical expulsive therapy should only be used in informed patients if active stone removal is not indicated. Treatment should be discontinued if complications develop (infection, refractory pain, deterioration of renal function). In the case of known uric acid stones in the distal ureter, a combination of alkalinisation with tamsulosin can increase the frequency of spontaneous passage. For details see Sections 3.4.3 and 3.4.4. 3.4.9.3. Indications for treatment of ureteral stones Indications for removal of ureteral stones are [176,334,336]: stones with a low likelihood of spontaneous passage;persistent pain despite adequate analgesic medication;persistent obstruction;renal insufficiency (renal failure, bilateral obstruction, or single kidney). 3.4.9.4. Selection of procedure for removal of ureteral stones The selection of the procedure depends on many factors, including stone-related factors, such as size, location, and density, as well as patient-related factors, such as body habitus, urinary anatomy, bleeding disorders, and other potential comorbidities. These and their influence on the outcomes of each of the procedures should be considered when counselling patients. As previously mentioned in this guideline, CT imaging can provide useful information that may influence the choice of treatment. A meta-analysis outlines that increasing stone density, stone burden, skin-to-stone distance, and hydronephrosis can negatively impact the success of the shockwave lithotripsy [337]. Overall, SFRs after URS or SWL for ureteral stones are comparable. However, larger stones achieve earlier stone-free status with URS. A large multi-center non-inferiority trial compared URS to SWL for ureteral stones. When excluding patients that had spontaneously passed their stone prior to treatment, SWL could not be considered non-inferior to URS with only 12% of patients needing further intervention after URS in comparison to 26% in the SWL arm [253]. In contrast to the success of SWL, comparative data on the outcomes of URS depending on patients’ BMI has shown URS to be as effective and safe in obese and morbidly obese patients as in non-obese patients [338]. The Panel performed a systematic review to assess the benefits and harms of URS compared to SWL [339]. Compared with SWL, URS was associated with a significantly greater SFR of up to four weeks, but the difference was not significant at three months in the included studies. Ureteroscopy was associated with fewer retreatments and the need for secondary procedures but with a higher need for adjunctive procedures, higher complication rates, and longer hospital stay. Counterbalancing for URS’s higher SFRs, SWL is associated with lower morbidity. Success rates and complications of URS are not impacted by previous unsuccessful SWL [340]. Clavien-Dindo grade complications were if reported, less frequent in patients treated with SWL [175]. Apart from the treatment modality, the timing of treatment may also be of importance. Primary or emergent ureteroscopy appears to be a safe and feasible procedure for patients presenting with renal colic due to an obstructive ureteral stone [341], without however increasing the stone-free rate. These results however are based mainly on low level of evidence reports and should be interpreted with caution [341]. Similarly, SWL can be performed in the acute setting or electively allowing a trial of spontaneous passage. In contrast to acute URS, SWL in the acute setting does provide an increased stone-free rate and reduced need for auxiliary procedures [342]. For large proximal ureteral stones, a percutaneous antegrade approach may provide better stone-free results than a retrograde ureteroscopic approach [343]. Bleeding disorderUreteroscopy can be performed in patients with bleeding disorders, with a moderate increase in complications (see also Section 3.4.8.2) [320]. 3.4.9.4.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for selection of procedure for active removal of ureteral stones Summary of evidenceLEObservation is feasible in informed patients who develop no complications (infection, refractory pain, deterioration of renal function).2aMedical expulsive therapy seems to be efficacious for treating patients with ureteral stones who are amenable to conservative management. The greatest benefit might be among those with > 5 mm (distal) stones.1aCompared with SWL, URS was associated with significantly greater SFRs up to four weeks, but the difference was not significant at three months in the included studies.1aUreteroscopy was associated with fewer retreatments and need for secondary procedures, but with a higher need for adjunctive procedures, greater complication rates and longer hospital stay.1aIn the case of severe obesity, URS is a more promising therapeutic option than SWL.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingIf active removal is not indicated (Section 3.4.9.3) in patients with newly diagnosed small* ureteral stones, observe patient initially with periodic evaluation.StrongOffer α-blockers as medical expulsive therapy as one of the treatment options for (distal) ureteral stones > 5 mm**.StrongInform patients that ureteroscopy (URS) has a better chance of achieving stone-free status with a single procedure.StrongInform patients that URS has higher complication rates when compared to shock wave lithotripsy.StrongUse URS as first-line therapy for ureteral (and renal) stones in cases of severe obesity.Strong *See stratification data [176]** Alpha-blockers are an off-label treatment for this indication Figure 3.1: Treatment algorithm for ureteral stones (if stone removal is indicated)SWL = shock wave lithotripsy; URS = Ureteroscopy. 