3.4.2. Management of sepsis and/or anuria in obstructed kidney. The obstructed kidney with all signs of urinary tract infection (UTI) and/or anuria is a urological emergency. Urgent decompression is often necessary to prevent further complications in infected hydronephrosis secondary to stone-induced, unilateral, or bilateral, renal obstruction. DecompressionThere are two options for urgent decompression of obstructed collecting systems [110]: placement of an indwelling ureteral stentpercutaneous placement of a nephrostomy tube. Several systematic reviews on the subject have been published, all of which emphasize that the available literature comparing different drainage modalities for obstructing stones with or without infection is scarce, based on small cohorts and of medium to very low quality [110]. There appears to be no difference in success rate or complication rate of both procedures and there is not a difference in time to defervescence in the population presenting with fever. Both meta-analyses identified patients receiving a nephrostomy tube to have a longer stay in the hospital. Based on the available data, a DJ stent has a more negative impact on the patients’ quality of life in comparison with a nephrostomy tube, which can be explained mainly by the stent-related symptoms that these patients experience [111,112]. Definitive stone removal should be delayed until the infection is cleared following a complete course of antimicrobial therapy. A small RCT showed the feasibility of immediate ureteroscopic stone removal combined with an appropriate antibiotic regimen; however, at the cost of longer hospital stay and higher analgesic requirements [113]. Further measuresAlong with urgent decompression of the obstructed and infected urinary collecting system, both urine- and blood samples should be sent for culture-antibiogram sensitivity testing and antibiotics should be initiated immediately [114,115]. The regimen should be re-evaluated in the light of the culture-antibiogram results. Although clinically well accepted, the impact of a second antibiogram test on treatment outcome has not yet been evaluated [116]. Intensive care might become necessary. 3.4.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of sepsis and anuria Summary of evidenceLEFor decompression of the renal collecting system, ureteral stents and percutaneous nephrostomy catheters are equally effective.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingUrgently decompress the collecting system in case of sepsis with obstructing stones, using percutaneous drainage or ureteral stenting.StrongDelay definitive treatment of the stone until sepsis is resolved.StrongCollect (again) urine for antibiogram test following decompression.StrongStart antibiotics immediately (+ intensive care, if necessary).StrongRe-evaluate antibiotic regimen following antibiogram findings.Strong 