3.4.11. Laparoscopy and open surgery. Advances in SWL and endourological surgery (URS and PCNL) have significantly decreased the indications for open or laparoscopic stone surgery [382-387]. There is a consensus that most complex stones, including partial and complete staghorn stones, should be approached primarily with PCNL. Additionally, a combined approach with PCNL and RIRS may also be an appropriate alternative. However, if percutaneous approaches are not likely to be successful, or if multiple endourological approaches have been performed unsuccessfully; open or laparoscopic surgery may be a valid treatment option [388-392]. Few studies have reported laparoscopic stone removal. These procedures are usually reserved for special cases. When expertise is available, laparoscopic ureterolithotomy can be performed for large proximal ureteral stones as an alternative to URS or SWL [393,394]. These more invasive procedures have yielded high SFRs and lower auxiliary procedure rates [196,205,389]. A systematic review showed no difference in the post-operative phase for stented or unstented laparoscopic ureterolithotomy [389]. Laparoscopic pyelolithotomy could be offered for solitary stones > 2 cm located in the renal pelvis as an alternative to PCNL [390]. In addition, in selected cases with an extrarenal and dilated pelvis, RLP can be considered as an alternative management of staghorn calculi [395]. A few studies with limited numbers of patients have reported using robotic surgery in the treatment of urinary stones [391]. Open surgery should be considered as the last treatment option after all other possibilities have been explored. Studies on laparoscopy should be interpreted with caution due to their low design and quality of evidence. 3.4.11.1. Recommendation for laparoscopy and open surgery RecommendationStrength ratingOffer laparoscopic or open surgical stone removal in rare cases in which shock wave lithotripsy, retrograde or antegrade ureteroscopy and percutaneous nephrolithotomy fail, or are unlikely to be successful.Strong 