3.4.6. Ureteroscopy (retrograde and antegrade). The current standard for rigid ureteroscopes is a tip diameter of < 8 French (F). Rigid URS can be used for the whole ureter [176]. However, technical improvements, as well as the availability of digital scopes, also favour the use of flexible ureteroscopes in the ureter [194]. Percutaneous antegrade removal of ureteral stones is a consideration in selected cases, i.e. large (> 15 mm), impacted proximal ureteral calculi in a dilated renal collecting system [195,196], or when the ureter is not amenable to retrograde manipulation [197]. Ureteroscopy for renal stones: Retrograde Intrarenal Surgery (RIRS)Technical improvements including endoscope miniaturisation, improved deflection mechanism, enhanced optical quality and tools, and introduction of disposables have led to an increased use of URS for both renal and ureteral stones. Major technological progress has been achieved for RIRS. A systematic review addressing renal stones > 2 cm showed a cumulative SFR of 91% with 1.45 procedures/patient; 4.5% of the complications were > Clavien 3 [198,199]. Digital scopes demonstrate shorter operation times due to the improvement in image quality [200]. Stones that cannot be extracted directly must be disintegrated. If it is difficult to access stones within the lower renal pole that need disintegration it may help to displace them into a more accessible calyx [201]. Best clinical practice in ureteroscopyAccess to the upper urinary tractMost interventions are performed under general anaesthesia, although local or spinal anaesthesia is possible [202]. Intravenous sedation is suitable for female patients with distal ureteral stones [203]. Smaller caliber (4.5/6 Fr) semi-rigid ureteroscope was associated with significantly higher SFR, lower rates of ureteric injury, and shorter hospital stay [204]. Antegrade URS is an option for large, impacted, proximal ureteral calculi [195,205]. Reduction of flexible ureteroscope diameter may provide similar vision, deflection, and manoeuvrability to standard flexible ureteroscopes potentially with improved ureteric access [206]. Disposable ureteroscopes provide similar safety and clinical effectiveness to reusable scopes. Concerns regarding cost-effectiveness and environmental sustainability remain [204,207-209]. Safety aspectsFluoroscopic equipment must be available in the operating room. The Panel recommends placement of a safety wire, even though some groups have demonstrated that URS can be performed without it [210-214]. Balloon and plastic dilators should be available, if necessary. Prior rigid URS can be helpful for optical dilatation followed by flexible URS, if necessary. If ureteral access is not possible, insertion of a JJ stent followed by URS after seven to fourteen days offers an alternative [215]. Bilateral URS during the same session is feasible resulting in equivalent-to-lower SFRs, but slightly higher overall complication rates (mostly minor, Clavien 1 and 2) [216,217]. Difficult lower pole anatomy such as steep infundibulopelvic angle predisposes to failure during RIRS [218]. A reusable flexible ureteroscope can be more helpful in reaching a difficult lower pole calyx [219]. Prolonged operative times are linked to increased complication rates in ureteroscopy, and efforts must be made to keep it below 90 minutes [220]. Ureteral access sheathsHydrophilic-coated ureteral access sheaths, which are available in different calibres (inner diameter from 9 F upwards), can be inserted (via a guide wire) with the tip placed in the proximal ureter. Ureteral access sheaths allow easy, multiple, access to the UUT and therefore significantly facilitate URS. The use of ureteral access sheaths improves vision by establishing a continuous outflow, decreases intrarenal pressure, and potentially reduces operating time [221,222]. The insertion of ureteral access sheaths may lead to ureteral damage, the risk is lowest in pre-stented systems [223]. No data on long-term side effects are available [198,223]. Whilst larger cohort series showed no difference in SFRs and ureteral damage (stricture rates of about 1.8%), they did show lower post-operative infectious complications [224,225]. Increasing sheath size directly determines higher grades of ureteral injury rates but there is no difference in long-term stricture rates [226]. The use of a ureteral access sheath is safe and can be useful for large and multiple renal stones or if long procedural time is expected [227]. Stone extractionThe aim of URS is complete stone removal. “Dust and go” strategies should be limited to the treatment of large (renal) stones [228]. Stones can be extracted by endoscopic forceps or baskets. Only baskets made of nitinol can be used for flexible URS [229]. Intracorporeal lithotripsyThe most effective lithotripsy system is the holmium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Ho: YAG) laser, which is currently the optimum standard for URS and flexible nephroscopy (Section 3.4.6), because it is effective in all stone types [230,231]. Compared to low-power lasers, high-power laser reduces procedural time although the reported difference in clinical outcomes was non-significant and based on a low level of evidence [232]. The only RCT to date shows no clinical difference regarding stone-free rate or operative time [233]. Although pulse-modulation in Ho: YAG lasers has demonstrated several in vitro benefits, a systematic review including 8 comparative studies and only one RCT showed no difference in stone-free rate, complication rate, or operative time [234]. The two available RCTs on the subject both found a shorter operative time, without conferring a difference in success rate [235,236]. Thulium fiber laser (TFL) for stone disease has a promising role and offers good clinical outcomes, which seem to be comparable to Ho: YAG laser (holmium) laser [237-239]. With the limited reports of clinical use available to date, a meta-analysis could not demonstrate the superiority of TFL over Ho: YAG, although the operative time to achieve this stone-free rate seems to be shorter with the use of TFL [240]. More comparative clinical studies are however needed between these two modalities. When a laser is not available, pneumatic and US systems can be used with high disintegration efficacy in rigid URS [241,242]. However, stone migration into the kidney is a common problem, which can be prevented by the placement of special anti-migration tools proximal to the stone [243]. Medical expulsion therapy following Ho: YAG laser lithotripsy increases SFRs and reduces colic episodes [244]. Stenting before and after URSRoutine stenting is not necessary before URS. Despite a complete lack of RCTs on this subject, a meta-analysis has been performed, demonstrating that pre-stenting may improve the stone-free rate of ureteroscopic treatment of renal stones, but not of ureteral stones [245]. Although it may facilitate ureteroscopic management of stones and increase success in access sheath placement, intra-operative complications were not significantly different [245,246]. One should also consider that pre-stenting also causes the patient to experience stent-related symptoms during the time the stent is indwelling, prior to a procedure. Randomised prospective trials have found that routine stenting after uncomplicated URS (complete stone removal) is not necessary; stenting might be associated with higher postoperative morbidity and costs [247]. Smaller diameter ureteric stents may reduce urinary symptoms and patient reported pain [248]. A ureteral catheter with a shorter indwelling time (one day) may also be used, with similar results [249]. Stents should be inserted in patients who are at increased risk of complications (e.g., ureteral trauma, residual fragments, bleeding, perforation, UTIs, or pregnancy), and in all doubtful cases, to avoid stressful emergencies. The ideal duration of stenting is not known. Most urologists favour one to two weeks after URS. Alpha-blockers reduce the morbidity of ureteral stents and increase tolerability [250]. Medical expulsive therapy before and after ureteroscopyMedical expulsion therapy before URS might reduce the risk for intra-operative ureteral dilatation, protect against ureteral injury when using access sheaths and increase stone-free rates four weeks after URS [251,252]. Medical expulsion therapy following Ho: YAG laser lithotripsy accelerates the spontaneous passage of fragments and reduces episodes of colic [244]. Complications of ureteroscopyThe overall complication rate after URS is 4-25% [253,254]. Most complications are minor and do not require intervention. There is evidence suggesting a risk of post-operative urosepsis of up to 5% [255,256]. Ureteral avulsion and strictures are rare (< 1%). Previous perforations, pre-operative positive urine cultures, comorbidities, and longer operation time are the most important risk factor for complications [220,257,258]. Infectious complications following URS can be minimised using prophylactic antibiotics, limiting stent dwell and procedural time, identification and treatment of UTI, and planning in patients with large stone burden and multiple comorbidities [259]. High intrarenal pressure (IRP) predisposes to URS complications, and measures should be used to reduce IRP. Currently, there are no accurate ways to measure the intra-operative IRP [260]. 3.4.6.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for retrograde URS, RIRS and antegrade ureteroscopy Summary of evidenceLEIn uncomplicated URS, a post-procedure stent need not be inserted.1aIn URS, pre-stenting has been shown to improve outcomes for renal stones.1aAn α-blocker can reduce stent-related symptoms and colic episodes.1aThe most effective lithotripsy system for flexible ureteroscopy is the Ho: YAG laser.2aPneumatic and US systems can be used with high disintegration efficacy in rigid URS.2aPercutaneous antegrade removal of proximal ureter stones, or laparoscopic ureterolithotomy are feasible alternatives to retrograde ureteroscopy, in selected cases.1bPre-treatment of patients undergoing URS with an α-blocker one week prior to the procedure reduces the need for active dilatation and increases the stone free rate.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingUse holmium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Ho: YAG) or Thulium fiber laser (TFL) laser lithotripsy for (flexible) ureteroscopy (URS).StrongPerform stone extraction only under direct endoscopic visualisation of the stone.StrongDo not insert a stent in uncomplicated cases.StrongOffer medical expulsive therapy for patients suffering from stent-related symptoms and after Ho: YAG laser lithotripsy to facilitate the passage of fragments.StrongUse percutaneous antegrade removal of ureteral stones as an alternative when shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) is not indicated or has failed, and when the upper urinary tract is not amenable to retrograde URS.StrongUse flexible URS (even for stones > 2 cm) in cases where percutaneous nephrolithotomy or SWL are not an option. However, in this case, there is a higher risk that a follow-up procedure and placement of a ureteral stent may be needed.Strong 