3.4.7. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy remains the standard procedure for large renal calculi. Different rigid and flexible endoscopes are available, and the selection is mainly based on the surgeon’s own reference. Standard access tracts are 24-30 F. Smaller access sheaths, < 18 F, were initially introduced for paediatric use, but are now increasingly utilized in the adult population [261,262]. ContraindicationsPatients receiving anticoagulant therapy must be monitored carefully pre-and post-operatively. Anti-coagulant therapy must be discontinued before PCNL [263]. Other important considerations include: untreated UTI;tumour in the presumptive access tract area;potential malignant kidney tumour;pregnancy (Section 3.4.14.1). Best clinical practiceIntracorporeal lithotripsySeveral methods for intracorporeal lithotripsy during PCNL are available. Ultrasonic, pneumatic, and combined systems are most commonly used for rigid nephroscopy, whilst the laser is increasingly used for miniaturised and flexible instruments [264]. Pre-operative imagingPre-procedural imaging evaluations are summarised in Section 3.3.1. In particular, US or CT of the kidney and the surrounding structures can provide information regarding interposed organs within the planned percutaneous path (e.g., spleen, liver, large bowel, pleura, and lung). Positioning of the patientBoth prone and supine positions are equally safe. A meta-analysis including twelve studies and a total of 1,290 patients treated, showed a similar SFR but a lower operative time for supine PCNL [265]. The supine position allows simultaneous retrograde access to the collecting system, using a flexible ureteroscope [266]. The combination of PCNL and RIRS may be a good alternative for the treatment of complex renal stones compared to standard PCNL; however, the existing evidence is of low-quality [265,267]. PunctureAlthough fluoroscopy is still the most common intra-operative imaging method, the use of US as an additional or only means of puncture guidance provides advantages according to two meta-analyses including eight randomised controlled trials. Additional to the expected reduced radiation exposure with the use of ultrasound the meta-analyses also demonstrated a lower complication rate [268,269]. Pre-operative CT or intra-operative US allows identification of the tissue between the skin and kidney and lowers the incidence of visceral injury. As an additional aid to increase puncture accuracy, the calyceal puncture may be done under direct visualisation using simultaneous flexible URS [270-272]. DilatationDilatation of the percutaneous access tract can be achieved using a metallic telescopic, single (one-shot or serial) dilator, or balloon dilatator. During PCNL, safety and effectiveness are similar for different tract dilatation methods [273]. Although there are papers demonstrating that single-step dilation is equally effective as other methods and that US only can be used for the dilatation, the difference in outcomes is most likely related to surgeon experience rather than to the technology used [273,274]. A meta-analysis of the most commonly used tract dilation methods suggested that one-step dilation would allow for a shorter operative time and reduced complication rate, including haemoglobin loss and transfusion rate [275]. Choice of instrumentsSeveral meta-analyses on mini-PCNL (12-22 F) vs. standard PCNL (> 22 F) have identified that both techniques allow for a similar SFR. Patients treated with mini-PCNL had reduced blood loss and transfusion rates, as well as a shorter hospital stay, without a significant difference in overall complication rates [262,276-278]. However, it is important to note that the level of evidence was downgraded due to heterogeneity of data related to tract sizes used and types of stones treated. There is some evidence for using suction during PCNL to reduce intra-renal pressure and increase SFR [279]. Post-operative drainageThe decision on whether, or not, to place a nephrostomy tube or a double J stent at the conclusion of the PCNL procedure depends on several factors, including: presence of residual stones;likelihood of a second-look procedure;significant intra-operative blood loss/ bleeding from the percutaneous tract;urine extravasation;ureteral obstruction;potential persistent bacteriuria due to infected stones;solitary kidney;bleeding diathesis;planned percutaneous chemolitholysis. Small-bore nephrostomies seem to have advantages in terms of postoperative pain [262,280,281]. Tubeless PCNL is performed without a nephrostomy tube and is associated with reduced post-operative pain and hospital stay [282]. When neither a nephrostomy tube nor a ureteral stent is introduced, the procedure is known as a totally tubeless PCNL [283]. In uncomplicated cases, the latter procedure results in a shorter hospital stay, with no disadvantages reported [284]. As reported in the above section on the drainage of an infected or obstructed system [110-112] (section 3.4.2), the quality of life may be slightly lower with a DJ stent in comparison to a short-term nephrostomy tube after PCNL. This should be weighed against the shorter hospital stay with a DJ stent [285]. Complications of percutaneous nephrolithotomyA systematic review of almost 12,000 patients shows the incidence of complications associated with PCNL; fever 10.8%, transfusion 7%, thoracic complication 1.5%, sepsis 0.5%, organ injury 0.4%, embolisation 0.4%, urinoma 0.2%, and death 0.05% [286]. Perioperative fever can occur, even with a sterile pre-operative urinary culture and peri-operative antibiotic prophylaxis, because the renal stones themselves may be a source of infection. The evidence demonstrates that a stone culture or urine culture taken directly from the renal pelvis is more predictive of post-operative SIRS or sepsis. Whenever possible a urine culture from the renal pelvis and/or stone culture should be taken at the time of PCNL [287]. Intra-operative renal stone or renal pelvic urine culture may be more indicative of the causative organism for sepsis; therefore, helping to select the most suitable postoperative antibiotics [287-289]. Although this data is weak, there is limited retrospective data indicating that increased pressures during mPCNL may contribute to febrile complications [290-292]. This contrasts with the previously mentioned meta-analyses on mini vs standard PCNL that do not identify a difference in complication rate between the two procedures [262,276-278]. Bleeding after PCNL may be treated by briefly clamping the nephrostomy tube. Super-selective embolic occlusion of the arterial branch may become necessary in the case of severe bleeding. Several meta-analyses have demonstrated that the use of tranexamic acid reduces bleeding complications and the transfusion rate of PCNL [293-295]. However, the transfusion rate in the control group of the meta-analyses was in the range of 10-12%. Depending on the stone burden and the patient’s anatomy, multiple tracts may be necessary to render the patient stone free in one session of PCNL. While this is a generally accepted practice, it should be highlighted that this comes with an increased risk of postoperative complications including pleural damage, infections, and the need for transfusion [296]. To reduce post-operative pain after PCNL, a peripheral nerve block can be performed at the intercostal nerve, paravertebral region, erector spinae, or quadratus lumborum. Such a block may significantly reduce the need for post-operative opioid analgesics [297,298]. Current evidence shows that a quadratus lumborum block or infiltration of a local anaesthetic around the nephrostomy tube may reduce post-operative pain and opioid consumption after PCNL [299,300]. 3.4.7.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for endourology techniques for renal stone removal Summary of evidenceLEImaging of the kidney with US or CT can provide information regarding inter-positioned organs within the planned percutaneous path (e.g., spleen, liver, large bowel, pleura, and lung).3Both prone and supine positions are equally safe with equivalent SFR.1aPercutaneous nephrolithotomy performed with small instruments tends to be associated with significantly lower blood loss, but the duration of procedure tended to be significantly longer. There are no significant differences in SFR or any other complications.1aIn uncomplicated cases, a totally tubeless PCNL results in a shorter hospital stay, with no increase in complication rate.1aPeri-operative use of tranexamic acid may reduce bleeding complications and transfusion rates.1aUrine cultures taken directly from the renal pelvis, or a stone culture are more predictive of post-PCNL sepsis than a pre-operative midstream urine culture.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform pre-procedural computed tomography (CT) imaging, including contrast medium when indicated or retrograde study when starting the procedure, to assess stone comprehensiveness and anatomy of the collecting system to ensure safe access to the renal stone.StrongPerform a tubeless (without nephrostomy tube) or totally tubeless (without nephrostomy tube and ureteral stent) percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) procedure, in uncomplicated cases.StrongTake a stone culture or urine culture directly from the renal pelvis at time of PCNL, if possible.Strong 