3.4.10. Specific stone management of renal stones. The natural history of small, non-obstructing asymptomatic calculi is not well defined, and the risk of progression is unclear. There is still no consensus on the follow-up duration, timing, and type of intervention. In an RCT patients with small asymptomatic renal stones, who were not treated actively, had a higher incidence of relapse [344]. 3.4.10.1. Conservative treatment (observation) Observation of renal stones, especially in calyces, depends on their natural history (Section 3.4.10.3). The recommendations provided are not supported by high-level literature [345]. There is a prospective trial supporting annual observation for asymptomatic inferior calyceal stones, < 10 mm. In case stone growth is detected, the follow-up interval should be lowered [346]. Intervention is advised for growing stones > 5 mm [347]. In a systematic review of patients with asymptomatic renal stones on active surveillance spontaneous stone passage rates varied from 3-29%, symptom development from 7-77%, stone growth from 5-66%, surgical intervention from 7-26% [345]. 3.4.10.2. Pharmacological treatment of renal stones Dissolution therapy seems to be an option for uric acid stones. See sections 3.4.4. and 3.4.8.4. 3.4.10.3. Indications for stone removal of renal stones Indications for the removal of renal stones include: stone growth;stones in high-risk patients for stone formation;obstruction caused by stones;infection;symptomatic stones (e.g., pain or haematuria) [348];patient preference;comorbidity;the social situation of the patient (e.g., profession or traveling); 3.4.10.4. Selection of procedure for active removal of renal stones For general recommendations and precautions see Section 3.4.8. 3.4.10.4.1. Stones in the renal pelvis or upper/middle calyces Shock wave lithotripsy, PCNL and RIRS are available treatment modalities for renal calculi. While PCNL efficacy is hardly affected by the stone size, the SFRs after SWL or URS are inversely proportional to stone size [253,349-355]. Although multiple treatments or sessions may be needed shock wave lithotripsy achieves good SFRs for stones up to 20 mm, except for those at the lower pole [351,356,357]. When SWL is considered, stones with density > 1,000 HU (and with high homogeneity) on non-contrast-enhanced CT are less likely to be disintegrated [43]. Endourology is considered an alternative because of the reduced need for repeated procedures and consequently a shorter time until stone-free status is achieved. For stones > 10 mm, mPCNL achieves a higher SFR than RIRS or SWL, but carries a higher risk of bleeding and is associated with a longer hospital stay; however, there is a high degree of heterogeneity among the included studies [353,355]. Stones > 20 mm should be treated primarily by PCNL, because SWL often requires multiple treatments, and is associated with an increased risk of ureteral obstruction (colic or steinstrasse) with a need for adjunctive procedures (Figure 3.2) [358]. Retrograde renal surgery cannot be recommended as first-line treatment for stones > 20 mm in uncomplicated cases as SFRs decrease, and staged procedures will be required [359-361]. However, it may be a first-line option in patients where PCNL is not an option or contraindicated or in selected patients [362]. The combination of PCNL and RIRS may be a good alternative for the treatment of complex renal stones compared to standard PCNL; however, the level of the existing evidence is low [265]. 3.4.10.4.2. Stones in the lower renal pole The stone clearance rate after SWL seems to be lower for stones in the inferior calyx than for other intra-renal locations. Although the disintegration efficacy of SWL is not limited compared to other locations, the fragments often remain in the calyx and cause recurrent stone formation. The reported SFR of SWL for lower pole calculi is 25-95%. The preferential use of endoscopic procedures is supported by some current reports, even for stones< 1 cm [350,352,356,358,361,363-370]. The following can impair successful stone treatment by SWL [371-377]: steep infundibular-pelvic angle;long calyx;long skin-to-stone distance;narrow infundibulum;shock wave-resistant stones (calcium oxalate monohydrate, brushite, or cystine). Further anatomical parameters cannot yet be established. Supportive measures such as inversion, vibration or hydration may facilitate stone clearance (See 3.4.5 SWL) [174,378,379]. If there are negative predictors for SWL, PCNL and RIRS might be reasonable alternatives, even for smaller calculi [363]. Retrograde renal surgery seems to have comparable efficacy to SWL [350,356,358,380]. Clinical experience has suggested a higher SFR of RIRS compared to SWL but at the expense of greater invasiveness. Depending on operator skills, stones up to 3 cm can be treated by RIRS [362,381]. However, staged procedures are frequently required. Although mini-PCNL has the highest success rate for the treatment of lower pole stones up to 2 cm, it comes at the expense of a higher complication rate and longer hospital stay [355]. In complex stone cases, open or laparoscopic approaches are possible alternatives although they are infrequently used. 3.4.10.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of renal stones Summary of evidenceLEIt is still debatable whether renal stones should be treated, or whether annual follow-up is sufficient for asymptomatic calyceal stones that have remained stable for six months.4Although the question of whether asymptomatic calyceal stones should be treated is still unanswered, stone growth, de novo obstruction, associated infection, and acute and/or chronic pain are indications for treatment.3Percutaneous nephrolithotomy is indicated in renal stones > 2 cm as primary option.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer active treatment for renal stones in case of stone growth, de novo obstruction, associated infection, and acute and/or chronic pain.WeakEvaluate stone composition before deciding on the method of removal, based on patient history, former stone analysis of the patient or Hounsfield unit (HU) on unenhanced computed tomography.StrongPerform percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) as first-line treatment of larger stones > 2 cm.StrongTreat larger stones (> 2 cm) with flexible ureteroscopy or shock wave lithotripsy (SWL), in cases where PCNL is not an option. However, in such instances there is a higher risk that a follow-up procedure and placement of a ureteral stent may be needed.StrongPerform PCNL or retrograde intrarenal surgery for the lower pole, even for stones > 1 cm, as the efficacy of SWL is limited (depending on favourable and unfavourable factors for SWL).StrongPerform PCNL or retrograde intrarenal surgery for the lower pole, even for stones > 1 cm, as the efficacy of SWL is limited (depending on favourable and unfavourable factors for SWL).Strong Figure 3.2: Treatment algorithm for renal stones (if/when active treatment is indicated)*The term ‘Endourology’ encompasses all PCNL and URS interventions.PCNL = percutaneous nephrolithotomy; RIRS = retrograde intrarenal surgery; SWL = shock wave lithotripsy; URS = ureteroscopy 