3.4.1. Renal colic. Pain reliefNon-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (including metamizole dipyrone), and paracetamol are effective in patients with acute stone colic [94] and have better analgesic efficacy than opioids [95]. Ibuprofen compared to ketorolac is a more rapid-acting drug in controlling pain caused by renal colic with a similar side effect profile [96]. Pain relief from intramuscular (i.m.) diclofenac compared favourably with those from intravenous (i.v.) ibuprofen and i.v. ketorolac; however, no recommendation can be given due to the way in which the results have been reported [97]. The addition of antispasmodics to NSAIDs does not result in better pain control. Patients receiving NSAIDs are less likely to require further analgesia in the short term. It should be taken into consideration that the use of diclofenac and ibuprofen increased major coronary events [94,95]. Oral diclofenac in the long-term increases the risk of cardiovascular events and upper GI bleeding [98]. Patients with significant risk factors for cardiovascular events should be treated with diclofenac only after careful consideration. As risks increase with dose and duration, the lowest effective dose should be used for the shortest duration [99]. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may affect renal function in those patients with pre-existing decreased GFR. In an RCT including 150 patients, Intradermal sterile water injection (ISWI) and diclofenac (i.m.) were shown equally effective for pain relief in acute renal colic. Intradermal sterile water injection may be an alternative to NSAIDs in pregnant patients or others where NSAIDs are contra-indicated [100]. Opioids, particularly pethidine, are associated with a high rate of vomiting compared to NSAIDs and carry a greater likelihood of further analgesia being needed [94,101]. If an opioid is used, it is recommended that it is not pethidine. Combination of opioids and NSAIDs increase analgetic effect compared to opioids alone [102]. Acupuncture seems to be effective in renal colic alone or in combination with analgetic drugs, but there is limited data [103,104]. Prevention of recurrent renal colicFacilitation of passage of ureteral stones is discussed in Section 3.4.9. For patients with ureteral stones that are expected to pass spontaneously, NSAID tablets or suppositories (e.g., diclofenac sodium, 100-150 mg/day, 3-10 days) may help reduce inflammation and the risk of recurrent pain [105,106]. Although NSAID can affect renal function in patients with already reduced function, it has no functional effect in patients with normal renal function [107]. The systematic review and MA by Hollingsworth et al., [108] addressed pain reduction as a secondary outcome and concluded that medical expulsive therapy (MET) seems efficacious in reducing pain episodes of patients with ureteral stones. If analgesia cannot be achieved medically, drainage, using stenting, percutaneous nephrostomy, or stone removal, is indicated [109]. 3.4.1.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the management of renal colic Summary of evidenceLENon-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are very effective in treating renal colic and are superior to opioids.1bFor symptomatic ureteral stones, stone removal as first-line treatment is a feasible option in selected patients.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory as the first drug of choice; depending on cardiovascular risk factors and side effects.StrongOffer opiates (hydromorphine, pentazocine or tramadol) as a second choice.WeakOffer renal decompression or ureteroscopic stone removal in case of analgesic refractory colic pain.Strong 