3.4.4. Chemolysis. Percutaneous irrigation chemolysisPercutaneous chemolysis is rarely used nowadays, for practical reasons. Percutaneous irrigation chemolysis may be an option for infection stones and theoretically also for uric acid stones. For dissolution of struvite stones, Suby’s G solution (10% hemiacidrin; pH 3.5-4) can be used. The method has been described in case series and literature reviews [131]. Oral chemolysisStones composed of uric acid, but not sodium or ammonium urate stones, can be dissolved by oral chemolysis. Prior stone analysis may provide information on stone composition. Urinary pH measurement and X-ray characteristics can provide information on the type of stone. Oral chemolysis is based on alkalinisation of urine by application of alkaline citrate or sodium bicarbonate. The pH should be adjusted to 7.0-7.2. Chemolysis is more effective at a higher pH, which might, however, promote calcium phosphate stone formation. Patients will need to adjust the dosage of alkalising medication by self-monitoring the pH of their urine. A SR shows a complete or partial dissolution in 80.5%, discontinuation rate of 10.2% with 15.7% requiring further intervention [132]. In the case of uric acid obstruction of the collecting system, oral chemolysis in combination with urinary drainage is indicated. A combination of alkalinisation with tamsulosin can increase the frequency of spontaneous passage of distal ureteral uric acid stones as shown in one RCT for stones > 5 mm [133]. Additional SWL might help to improve the results but evidence is weak [134]. 3.4.4.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for chemolysis Summary of evidenceLEIrrigation chemolysis has been used in limited clinical settings to dissolve struvite stones.3Uric acid stones > 5mm can be dissolved based on oral alkalinisation of the urine above 7.0.3For obstructing uric acid stones, a combination of oral chemolysis with tamsulosin is more effective than each substance alone, particularly in stones > 8 mm.1b Recommendations (oral chemolysis of uric acid stones)Strength ratingInform the patient how to monitor urine-pH by dipstick and to modify the dosage of alkalising medication according to urine pH, as changes in urine pH are a direct consequence of such medication.StrongCarefully monitor patients during/after oral chemolysis of uric acid stones.StrongCombine oral chemolysis with tamsulosin in case of (larger) ureteral stones (if active intervention is not indicated).Weak 