3.4.14. Management of specific patient groups. 3.4.14.1. Management of urinary stones and related problems during pregnancy Clinical management of a pregnant patient with urolithiasis is complex and demands close collaboration between the patient, radiologist, obstetrician, and urologist [64]. For diagnostic imaging see Section 3.3.1. Patients with urolithiasis may be at increased risk of developing adverse maternal or neonatal outcomes [413]. Conservative approaches for symptomatic hydronephrosis as well as for ureteric calculi are the preferred initial management option in pregnant patients [414,415]. If spontaneous passage does not occur, or if complications develop (e.g., intractable symptoms, severe hydronephrosis, spontaneous renal fornix rupture [416] or induction of premature labour), placement of a ureteral stent or a percutaneous nephrostomy tube is necessary as it is more effective than conservative treatment for symptom relief [417-419]. In the treatment of renal stones during pregnancy, when a stent is necessary, PCNL versus ureteral stent placement does not confer a significant difference in rates of adverse pregnancy events. However, ureteral stent placement was associated with a lower incidence of hospital admissions, emergency department visits, exchange procedures, and new UTIs or pyelonephritis [420]. Ureteroscopy has become a reasonable alternative in these situations [408,421]. When compared to temporary ureteral JJ stenting until after delivery, ureteroscopy resulted in fewer needs for stent exchanges, less irritative LUTS and better patient satisfaction [422,423]. Non-urgent ureteroscopy in pregnant women is best performed during the second trimester, by an experienced urologist. Counselling of the patient should include access to neonatal and obstetric services [72]. Although feasible, percutaneous removal of renal stones during pregnancy remains an individual decision and should be performed only in experienced centres [424]. Pregnancy remains an absolute contraindication for SWL. 3.4.14.1.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for the management of urinary stones and related problems during pregnancy Summary of evidenceLEStent insertion seems to be more effective than conservative treatment in the management of symptomatic moderate-to-severe hydronephrosis during pregnancy.1aUreteroscopy is a reasonable alternative to avoid long-term stenting/drainage.1bThere is a higher tendency for stent encrustation during pregnancy.3 RecommendationStrength ratingTreat all uncomplicated cases of urolithiasis in pregnancy conservatively (except when there are clinical indications for intervention).Strong 3.4.14.2. Management of stones in patients with urinary diversion AetiologyPatients with urinary diversion are at high risk for stone formation in the renal collecting system and ureter or in the conduit or continent reservoir [425,426]. Metabolic factors (hypercalciuria, hyperoxaluria and hypocitraturia), infection with urease-producing bacteria, foreign bodies, mucus secretion, and urinary stasis are responsible for stone formation [427] (section 3.1.3). One study has shown that the risk for recurrent upper tract stones in patients with urinary diversion subjected to PCNL was 63% at five years [428]. ManagementSmaller upper-tract stones can be treated effectively with SWL [429,430]. In most cases, endourological techniques are necessary to achieve stone-free status [431]. In individuals with long, tortuous conduits or with invisible ureter orifices, a retrograde endoscopic approach might be difficult or impossible [432]. For stones in the conduit, a trans-stomal approach can be used to remove all stone material (along with the foreign body) using standard techniques, including intracorporeal lithotripsy and flexible endoscopes. Trans-stomal manipulations in continent urinary diversion must be performed carefully to avoid disturbance of the continence mechanism [433]. Before considering any percutaneous approach in these cases, CT should be undertaken to assess the presence of overlying bowel, which could make this approach unsafe [434], and if present, a surgical approach should be considered. PreventionRecurrence risk is high in patients with urinary diversion [428]. Metabolic evaluation and close follow-up are necessary to obtain the risk parameters for effective long-term prevention. Preventive measures include medical management of metabolic abnormalities, appropriate therapy of urinary infections, and hyper-diuresis or regular irrigation of continent reservoirs [435]. 3.4.14.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for the management of stones in patients with urinary diversion Summary of evidenceLEThe choice of access depends on the feasibility of orifice identification in the conduit or bowel reservoir. Whenever a retrograde approach is impossible, percutaneous access with antegrade ureteroscopy is the alternative.4 RecommendationStrength ratingPerform percutaneous lithotomy to remove large renal stones in patients with urinary diversion, as well as for ureteral stones that cannot be accessed via a retrograde approach, or that are not amenable to shock wave lithotripsy.Strong 3.4.14.3. Management of stones in patients with neurogenic bladder Aetiology, clinical presentation, and diagnosisPatients with neurogenic bladder develop urinary calculi because of additional risk factors such as bacteriuria, hydronephrosis, VUR, renal scarring and lower urinary tract reconstruction [436,437]. The most common causes are urinary stasis and infection (Section 3.1.3). Indwelling catheters and surgical interposition of bowel segments for treatment of bladder dysfunction both facilitate UTI. Although calculi can form at any level of the urinary tract, they occur more frequently in the bladder; especially if bladder augmentation has been performed [438,439]. Diagnosis of stones may be difficult and delayed in the absence of clinical symptoms due to sensory impairment and vesicourethral dysfunction. Difficulties in self-catheterisation should lead to suspicion of bladder calculi. Imaging studies are needed (US, CT) to confirm the clinical diagnosis prior to surgical intervention. ManagementManagement of calculi in patients with neurogenic bladder is similar to that described in Section 3.3. Any surgery in these patients must be performed under general anaesthesia because of the impossibility of using spinal anaesthesia. Bone deformities often complicate positioning on the operating table [440]. The risk of stone formation after augmentation cystoplasty in immobile patients with sensory impairment can be significantly reduced by irrigation protocols [435]. For efficient long-term stone prevention in patients with neurogenic bladder, correction of the metabolic disorder, appropriate infection control, and restoration of normal storing/voiding function of the bladder are needed. 3.4.14.3.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for the management of stones in patients with neurogenic bladder Summary of evidenceLEPatients undergoing urinary diversion and/or suffering from neurogenic bladder dysfunction are at risk for recurrent stone formation.3 3.4.14.4. Management of stones in patients with transplanted kidneys Stones in transplanted kidneys can either be transplanted or present de novo allograft stones. Usually, they are detected by routine US examination, followed by NCCT in cases of unclear diagnosis [441]. AetiologyTransplant patients depend on their solitary kidneys for renal function. Impairment causing urinary stasis/obstruction, therefore, requires immediate intervention or drainage of the transplanted kidney. Stones in kidney allografts have an incidence of 2% [441]. Risk factors for de novo stone formation in these patients are multi-fold: Immunosuppression increases the infection risk, resulting in recurrent UTIs.Hyper-filtration, excessively alkaline urine, renal tubular acidosis (RTA), and increased serum calcium caused by persistent tertiary hyperparathyroidism [442] are biochemical risk factors. ManagementSelecting the appropriate technique for stone removal in a transplanted kidney is difficult, although management principles are like those applied in other single renal units [443-445]. Additional factors such as transplant function, coagulative status, and anatomical alterations due to the iliac position of the organ, directly influence the surgical strategy. For large or ureteral stones, careful percutaneous access and subsequent antegrade endoscopy are more favourable. The introduction of small flexible ureteroscopes and the holmium laser has made URS a valid treatment option for transplant calculi; however, one must be aware of potential injury to adjacent organs [444,446,447]. Retrograde access to transplanted kidneys can be difficult due to the anterior location of the ureteral anastomosis, and ureteral tortuosity [448-450]. Treatment of donor stones may be needed pre-transplant and increases the pool available for renal transplants. Post-transplant stone disease may also need treatment to maintain the allograft function. A systematic review evaluating the outcomes of pre- vs. post-transplant URS demonstrated a 100% SFR with an overall 7.5% complication rate, compared to a SFR of 60-100% with an overall complication rate of 12.9% for post-transplant URS; most complications were Clavien 1 [451]. A SR shows that SWL is also a safe and effective option for de novo stones after transplantation, with an overall SFR of 81% and a complication rate of 17.2% [452]. 3.4.14.4.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for the management of stones in patients with transplanted kidneys Summary of evidenceLEConservative treatment for small asymptomatic stones is only possible under close surveillance and in absolutely compliant patients.3Shock wave lithotripsy for small calyceal stones is an option with minimal risk of complication, but localisation of the stone can be challenging.3 RecommendationStrength ratingOffer patients with transplanted kidneys any of the contemporary management options, including shock wave lithotripsy, flexible ureteroscopy and percutaneous nephrolithotomy.Strong 3.4.14.5. Special problems in stone removal Table 3.11: Special problems in stone removal [453] Special problems in stone removalCalyceal diverticulum stonesSWL, PCNL [454] (if possible) or RIRS [454,455].Can also be removed using laparoscopic retroperitoneal surgery [456,457].Patients may become asymptomatic due to stone disintegration (SWL), whilst well-disintegrated stone material remains in the original position due to narrow calyceal neck.Horseshoe kidneysCan be treated in line with the options described above [458-460].Passage of fragments after SWL might be poor.Acceptable SFRs (up to 76%) with low major complication rates (2.4%) can be achieved with flexible ureteroscopy [458-460].Stones in pelvic kidneysSWL, RIRS, PCNL or laparoscopic surgery [461].Stones formed in a continent reservoirEach stone must be considered and treated individually.Patients with obstruction of the UPJWhen outflow abnormality requires correction, stones can be removed by PCNL together with percutaneous endopyelotomy or open/laparoscopic reconstructive surgery.URS together with endopyelotomy with Ho:YAG laser [462]. 