4.7.1. Epidemiology, aetiology, pathophysiology. Pelvic organ prolapse is a common condition in adult women. The prevalence of POP is 3–6% when bothersome symptoms are used to characterise the condition and increases to 50% when a purely anatomical definition is used [619]. The estimated lifetime risk for POP surgery is 12.6% [620]. Parity, vaginal delivery, ageing, and obesity are the most commonly recognised risk factors [621]. Although the aetiology of POP is not fully understood, birth trauma to the levator ani complex is recognised as central to its development. In normal physiology, an intact levator ani complex functionally closes the genital hiatus surrounding the vagina, limiting the pressure gradient between the intra-abdominal and intravaginal areas. During physical activities, this reduces stress on the endopelvic fascia and its condensations (e.g., ligaments), which are crucial in securing the bladder, uterus, and rectum to their surroundings. Current aetiological concepts include widening of the levator hiatus due to birth trauma, which creates a low-pressure area in the vagina and consequently increased stress on the ligaments, fascial elements, and PFMs during physical activity. When the supporting function of the muscles and connective tissues fails, POP may develop [622]. This concept also explains the time lapse between birth trauma and occurrence of POP. Pelvic organ prolapse and LUTS often occur simultaneously in women. In isolation, both POP and LUTS are prevalent conditions in women, although the prevalence of LUTS in women with POP exceeds that of LUTS in women without POP [619]. In a meta-analysis and SR, consistent results demonstrated a higher prevalence of OAB symptoms and UUI in patients with POP than without POP [619,623]. The observation that LUTS may improve or worsen after POP treatment suggests a link between these two entities [619]. Clinical examples include the occurrence of BOO symptoms in severe POP, and disappearance of SUI symptoms with progression of POP (and conversely the occurrence of SUI after treatment of POP) [624]. Pelvic organ prolapse is also associated with symptoms of bowel and/or sexual dysfunction [625]. 