8.1. Introduction. Surveillance after treatment for RCC allows the urologist to monitor or identify: post-operative complications;renal function;local recurrence;recurrence in the contralateral kidney;distant metastases;cardiovascular events. There is no consensus on follow-up strategies after RCC treatment, with limited evidence suggesting that more frequent post-operative imaging intervals do not provide any improvement for early detection of recurrence that would lead to improved survival [642]. As such, intensive radiological surveillance may not be necessary for all patients. Follow-up is also important to assess functional outcomes and to limit long-term sequelae such as renal function impairment, ESRD and cardiovascular events [644]. Currently, the key question is whether any recurrence detection during follow-up and subsequent treatment will lead to any meaningful change in survival outcome for these patients. In contrast to high-grade and/or locally-advanced disease, the outcome after surgery for T1a low-grade tumours is almost always excellent. It is therefore reasonable to stratify follow-up, taking into account the risk of each different RCC to develop a local or distant recurrence. Although there is no randomised evidence, large studies have examined prognostic factors with long follow-up [197,645,646] (LE: 4). One study has shown a survival benefit in patients who were followed within a structured surveillance protocol vs. patients who were not [647]; patients undergoing follow-up seem to have a longer OS when compared to patients not undergoing routine follow-up [647]. Furthermore, an individualised and risk-based approach to RCC follow-up has recently been proposed. The authors used competing risk models, incorporating patient age, pathologic stage, relapse location and comorbidities, to calculate when the risk of non-RCC death exceeds the risk of RCC recurrence [648]. For patients with low-stage disease but with a Charlson comorbidity index > 2, the risk of non-RCC death exceeded that of abdominal recurrence risk already one month after surgery, regardless of patient age. As for pshylogical factors, a SR including 15 studies revealed that psychological distress (defined as anxiety, depression, or psychological distress at any time during treatment or follow-up) is also prevalent among renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients, reaching up to 77% in non-metastatic cases [649]. The RECUR consortium, initiated by this Panel, collects similar data with the aim to provide comparators for guideline recommendations. Recently published RECUR data support a risk-based approach; more specifically a competing-risk analysis showed that for low-risk patients, the risk of non-RCC related death exceeded the risk of RCC recurrence shortly after the initial surgery. For intermediate-risk patients, the corresponding time point was reached around four to five years after surgery. In high-risk patients, the risk of RCC recurrence continuously exceeded the risk of non-RCC related death [650]. In the near future, genetic profiling may refine the existing prognostic scores and external validation in datasets from adjuvant trials have been promising in improving stratification of patient’s risk of recurrence [650,651]. Recurrence after PN is rare, but early diagnosis is relevant, as the most effective treatment is surgery [633,652]. Recurrence in the contralateral kidney is rare (1-2%) and can occur late (median 5-6 years) [653] (LE: 3). Follow-up can identify local recurrences or metastases at an early stage. At recurrence, extensive metastatic tumour growth can hinder the opportunity for surgical resection. In addition, early diagnosis of tumour recurrence may enhance the efficacy of systemic treatment if the tumour burden is low. 