3.16.4. Management. Adequate fluid intake and restricting the use of salt within daily allowance range are the general recommendations besides the specific medical treatment against the detected metabolic abnormalities. With the advance of technology, stone management has changed from open surgical approaches to endoscopic techniques that are less invasive. Deciding on the type of treatment depends on the number, size, location, stone composition and the anatomy of the urinary tract [1084,1095,1096]. Expectant management is the initial management in children with asymptomatic small size stones (< 4-5 mm ) with a possibility of spontaneous clearance. A recent study in a paediatric population showed that stone size > 6.7mm and haematuria were negative predictors for spontaneous stone passage [1097]. There is no consensus on the size of stones for different ages eligible for clearance and the duration of conservative follow-up. Adult literature reveals the benefits of medical expulsive therapy (MET) using α-blockers. Although, experience in children is limited showing different results [1098], a meta-analysis of three randomised and two retrospective studies demonstrate that treatment with MET results in increased odds of spontaneous ureteral stone passage and a low rate of adverse events [1085,1099]. Stone size, and ureteral wall thickness were found to be highly predictive for MET success; patient age, BMI, stone density and degree of hydronephrosis had no predictive value in this aspect [1100]. Another RCT in the age group of 6-14 years comparing the effectivity of Silodosin, Tamsulosin and placebo as MET for distal ureteric stones less than 1 cm revealed higher stone expulsion rate for Silodosin (89.3%), compared to Tamsulosin (74.5%) and placebo (51.8%) in children [1101]. A Cochrane review including 125 children from 1-18 years old with Ca-containing idiopathic nephrolithiasis showed that oral potassium citrate may reduce recurrence after SWL; however a substantial number of children stopped medication due to adverse events [1102]. Currently, most paediatric stones can easily be managed by SWL, RIRS or PCNL. Only a small portion of children with anatomical abnormalities may require other types of surgical intervention (open, robotic, laparoscopic). All attempts must be made to completely remove all stones since post-operative residual fragments pass spontaneously in only 20-25% of cases [1103,1104]. A congenital obstructive uropathy should be managed together with stone removal therapy to prevent recurrence. 