3.16.4.3. Ureterorenoscopy. The increasing availability of smaller size endourological equipment has made it possible to manage paediatric ureteral stones using endoscopic techniques. The technique used in children is similar to the one used in adults. It is strongly recommended that guidewires are used and the procedure is performed using direct vision. Routine balloon dilation of the ureterovesical junction and ureteral stenting are controversial. In general, ureteric dilatation is being performed only in selected cases. There is a tendency to use hydrodilation more because it is similarly effective [1139,1179,1180]. Different lithotripsy techniques, including ultrasonic, pneumatic and laser lithotripsy, have all been shown to be safe and effective. Due to the smaller size of the probes, laser energy is easier to use in smaller instruments and is more useful for paediatric cases [1181]. All studies reporting the use of endoscopy for ureteric stones in children have clearly demonstrated that there is no significant risk of ureteric strictures or reflux with this mode of therapy. The risk of post-operative hydronephrosis depends on the presence of impacted stone and ureteral injury during operation [1182]. A multi-institutional study on the use of semi-rigid ureteroscopy for ureteral calculi in children showed that the procedure is effective with a 90% SFR and efficacy quotient. The study also focused on the factors affecting the complication rates. The authors found that, although operating time, age, institutional experience, orifice dilation, stenting and stone burden were significant on univariate analysis, multivariate analysis revealed that operating time was the only significant parameter affecting the complication rate [1179]. However, for proximal ureteral stones semi-rigid ureteroscopy is not a good first option because of higher complication and failure rates [1183]. A literature review contains a growing number of case series on the use of flexible ureterorenoscopic interventions in children. Both intrarenal and ureteric stones can be treated using this approach [1184-1189]. In these series, the authors generally did not use active orifice dilation, but attempted to use a ureteral sheath where possible. However, an important problem was the inability to obtain retrograde access to the ureter in approximately half of the cases [1185,1187]. This problem can be overcome by stenting and leaving the stent indwelling for passive dilation of the orifice, and performing the procedure in a second session. The success rates varied between 60 and 100%, with a negligible number of complications [1184,1186-1188,1190]. The need for additional procedures was related to stone size [1188]. Radiation exposure during URS can be minimised by using Flat Panel Detector c-Arms while simultaneously improving image quality [1191]. One RCT and four other comparative studies showed that retrograde intra-renal surgery (RIRS) had similar stone-free rates compared to SWL after three months, with fewer sessions [1134,1192-1195]. However for stones larger than 20 mm, RIRS monotherapy has lower stone-free rates than mini-PCNL with the advantages of decreased radiation exposure, fewer complications and shorter hospital stay [1196]. In contrast, for stones between 10-20 mm, RIRS has similar success and complication rates and shorter hospital stay and low radiation exposure when compared to micro-PCNL [1197]. A recent systematic review revealed that compared with the other two treatments, PCNL had a longer operative time, fluoroscopy time and hospital stay. Shockwave lithotripsy had a shorter hospital stay, higher retreatment rate and auxiliary rate in comparison with the other two treatments. It was also shown that PCNL presented a higher efficacy quotient than the other two treatments, and RIRS had a lower efficiency than SWL and PCNL. In the subgroup analysis of paediatric patients with stone ≤ 20 mm, the comparative results were similar to those described above, except for the higher complication rate of PCNL than SWL [1198]. 