3.16.4.4. Open or laparoscopic stone surgery. Most stones in children can be managed by SWL and endoscopic techniques. However, in some situations, open surgery is inevitable. Good candidates for open stone surgery include very young children with large stones and/or a congenitally obstructed system, which also requires surgical correction. Open surgery is also necessary in children with severe orthopaedic deformities that limit positioning for endoscopic procedures. In centres with well-established experience, a laparoscopic approach may be a good alternative for some cases as a last resort before open surgery. Suitable candidates include patients who have a history of previously failed endoscopic procedures, complex renal anatomy (ectopic or retrorenal colon), concomitant UPJ obstruction or caliceal diverticula, mega-ureter, or large impacted stones. Laparoscopic stone surgery via conventional or a robot-assisted transperitoneal or retroperitoneal approach can be attempted. However, there is limited experience with these techniques and they are not routine therapeutic modalities [1199-1202]. Bladder stones in children can usually be managed by endoscopic techniques. A recent randomised trial compared transurethral cystolithotripsy versus percutaneous cystolithotripsy for bladder stones smaller than 30 mm and found similar success and complication rates with success rates more than 95% [1203]. Open surgery may also be used for very large bladder stones or for bladder stones caused by an anatomical problem. In addition to the advantages and disadvantages of each treatment modality for the specific size and location of the stone, consideration has to be given to the availability of the instruments and the experience with each treatment modality before the choice of technique is made. Recommendations for interventional management are given in Table 4. Table 4: Recommendations for management in paediatric stones Stone size and localisation*Primary treatment optionAlternative treatment optionsCommentInfant microlithiasis (<3mm, any location)ObservationIntervention and/or medical treatmentIndividualised decision according to size progression, symptoms and metabolic factors.Staghorn stonesPCNLOpen/SWLMultiple sessions and accesses with PCNL may be needed. Combination with SWL may be useful.Pelvis < 10 mmSWLRIRS/PCNLPelvis 10-20 mmSWL/PCNL/RIRSMultiple sessions with SWL may be needed. PCNL and RIRS have a similar recommendation grade.Pelvis > 20 mmPCNLSWL/RIRSMultiple sessions with SWL may be needed.Lower pole calyx< 10mmObservation or SWLPCNL/RIRSStone clearance after SWL is lower than other locations.Lower pole calyx> 10mmPCNLRIRS/SWLAnatomical variations are important for complete clearance after SWL.Upper ureteric stonesSWLURSFlexible scopes may be needed in case of retropulsion.Lower ureteric stonesURSSWLBladder stonesEndoscopic (transurethral or percutaneous)SWL/OpenOpen is easier and with less operative time with large stones. * Cystine and uric acid stones excluded.PCNL = percutaneous nephrolithotomy; SWL = shockwave lithotripsy; RIRS = retrograde intrarenal surgery; URS = ureteroscopy. 