6.1. Conservative options. 6.1.1. Observation A stricture will usually result in diminution in flow once the calibre of the urethral lumen is < 10 Fr [144]. In other strictures (> 10 Fr), the diagnosis is often made by coincidence in asymptomatic patients because of a urologic examination for other reasons (e.g., cystoscopy, need for urethral catheterisation) [144]. Purohit et al., performed observation and repeated cystoscopic evaluation of 42 subclinical, incidentally encountered strictures (> 16 Fr). After a median follow-up of 23 months, only five (12%) strictures progressed to a low-grade stricture (11-15 Fr). No patient developed symptoms and none of them needed surgical intervention [144]. These patients are candidates for observation although no evidence exist on the long-term evolution of these strictures. In a series of anatomic stricture recurrence (< 16 Fr) after urethroplasty, only 65% of patients were symptomatic [145]. Some asymptomatic patients refused further intervention because they had experienced substantial improvement after their primary urethroplasty. These patients were considered as functional “success” [145]. A multicentric study of the Trauma and Urologic Reconstructive Network of Surgeons observed an important discrepancy between cystoscopic recurrence and need for further intervention [143]. Patients with a large calibre (> 16 Fr) recurrence had a one and two-year need for intervention rate of 4% and 12%, respectively. Of note, patients with small-calibre (< 16 Fr) recurrence had a one and two-year need for intervention rate of only 41% and 49%. Patients who needed intervention had poorer PROMs suggesting clinical symptoms and bother. There is no information on long-term complications in patients with recurrences who did not undergo intervention. In cases of an asymptomatic stricture recurrence, it might be an option not to intervene but to perform regular follow-up. Care must be taken about the term “asymptomatic” stricture (recurrence) as patients might conceal their bother and symptoms by different means (not drinking, social avoidance) and might only search for medical help once concealment is no longer tenable [190]. 6.1.2. Suprapubic catheter Radiation-induced urethral strictures are a difficult to treat population as stricture-free rates for urethral reconstruction are lower compared to those in non-irradiated patients [191]. Fuchs et al., evaluated 75 patients who were initially treated by suprapubic diversion for radiation-induced isolated BMS [192]. Only 51% eventually decided to undergo urethroplasty after a mean follow-up period of 25 months. Although there was no significant difference in overall performance status between patients with a chronic suprapubic catheter vs. those undergoing urethroplasty, all patients with a poor performance score remained with a suprapubic catheter. Patients with concomitant stress urinary incontinence (SUI) opted more often to keep their suprapubic catheter as the SUI improved in 61% of cases. On the other hand, patients who kept their suprapubic catheter suffered from catheter-related complications in 27% of cases. Urinary diversion by ileal conduit was performed in 30% of patients who remained with a suprapubic catheter while this was only the case in 8% who underwent urethroplasty. A suprapubic catheter is also an option in frail patients not able to undergo surgery or in patients who do not want (further) urethral surgery and are willing to accept the complications of a suprapubic catheter [193]. Summary of evidenceLEPatients with asymptomatic incidental (> 16 Fr) strictures have a low risk of progression and to develop symptoms.3Only half of the patients initially treated with a suprapubic catheter for radiation-induced bulbomembranous strictures will proceed with urethroplasty.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not intervene in patients with asymptomatic incidental (> 16 Fr) strictures.WeakConsider long-term suprapubic catheter in patients with radiation-induced bulbomembranous strictures and/or poor performance status.Weak 