7.1. Localised low-risk disease. 7.1.1. General considerations on kidney-sparing surgery Kidney-sparing surgery for low-risk UTUC reduces the morbidity associated with radical nephroureterectomy (e.g., loss of kidney function), without compromising oncological outcomes [208]. In low-risk cancers, it is the preferred approach as survival is similar to that after RNU [208]. This option should therefore be discussed in all low-risk cases, irrespective of the status of the contralateral kidney, in a shared-decision making process with the patient. Recommendations for kidney-sparing management of UTUC are listed in Section 7.1.7. 7.1.2. Ureteroscopy Endoscopic ablation should be considered in patients with clinically low-risk cancer [209,210]. A flexible ureteroscope is useful in the management of pelvicalyceal tumours [211]. The patient should be informed of the need and be willing and able to comply with an early second-look URS [212] and stringent surveillance; complete tumour resection or destruction is necessary [212]. Nevertheless, a risk of disease progression remains with endoscopic management due to the suboptimal performance of imaging and biopsy for risk stratification and tumour biology [213]. A systematic review reported comparable survival outcomes after endoscopic treatment to radical nephroureterectomy at the cost of higher local recurrence rates and repeated interventions, but also with some uncertainties about long-term renal preservation after endoscopic treatment [214]. 7.1.3. Percutaneous access Percutaneous management can be considered for low-risk UTUC in the renal pelvis [209,215]. This may also be offered for low-risk tumours in the lower caliceal system that are inaccessible or difficult to manage by flexible URS. However, this approach is being used less due to the availability of improved endoscopic tools such as distal-tip deflection of recent ureteroscopes [210,215]. Moreover, a risk of tumour seeding remains with percutaneous access [215]. 7.1.4. Ureteral resection Segmental ureteral resection with adequate margins provides sufficient pathological specimens for staging and grading while preserving the ipsilateral kidney. Segmental resection of the proximal two-thirds of ureter is associated with higher failure rates than for the distal ureter [216,217]. Distal ureterectomy with ureteroneocystostomy is indicated for low-risk tumours in the distal ureter that cannot be completely removed endoscopically [199,216,218]. A total ureterectomy with an ileal-ureteral substitution or renal autotransplantation with pyelocystostomy is technically feasible, but only in selected cases when a renal-sparing procedure is mandatory and the tumour is low risk [219,220]. 7.1.5. Chemo-ablation A single-arm phase III trial including 71 patients with biopsy-proven low-grade UTUC less than 15 mm showed that the use of mitomycin-containing reverse thermal gel (UGN-101) instillations (6 weekly induction) in a chemoablation setting via retrograde catheter to the renal pelvis and calyces was associated with a complete response rate in a total of 41 patients (58%) [221]. The most frequently reported all-cause adverse events (AEs) were: ureteric stenosis in 31 (44%), urinary tract infection in 23 (32%), haematuria in 22 (31%), flank pain in 21 (30%), nausea in 17 (24%) and 19/31 (61%) reported ureteric stenosis requiring treatment. Among the 41 patients with complete response, 29 received at least one maintenance instillation (median of 6), 23/41 (56%) remained disease free at one year [221]. 7.1.6. Adjuvant instillations 7.1.6.1. Upper urinary tract The antegrade instillation of BCG or mitomycin C in the upper urinary tract via percutaneous nephrostomy after complete tumour eradication has been studied for CIS after kidney-sparing management [186,222]. Retrograde instillation through a single-J open-ended ureteric stent is also used. Before both the antegrade and retrograde approach a nephro-ureterogram needs to rule out ureteric obstruction or leakage, asses that there is no infection and ensure a low pressure system to avoid pyelovenous influx during instillation/perfusion. The reflux obtained from a double-J stent has been used but this approach is suboptimal because the drug often does not reach the renal pelvis [223-226]. A systematic review and meta-analysis assessing the oncologic outcomes of patients with papillary UTUC or CIS of the upper tract treated with kidney-sparing surgery and adjuvant endocavitary treatment analysed the effect of adjuvant therapies (i.e., chemotherapeutic agents and/or immunotherapy with BCG) after kidney- sparing surgery for papillary non-invasive (Ta–T1) UTUCs and BCG for the treatment of upper tract CIS, finding no difference between the method of drug administration (antegrade vs. retrograde vs. combined approach) in terms of recurrence, progression, CSS, and OS; however, all included studies were underpowered and highly heterogeneous. Furthermore, the recurrence rates following adjuvant instillations are comparable to those reported in the literature in untreated patients, questioning their efficacy [227]. The analyses were based on retrospective small studies suffering from publication and reporting bias. Recent evidence suggests that early single adjuvant intracavitary upper tract instillation of mitomycin C in patients with low-grade UTUC might reduce the risk of local recurrence [228]. The authors report limited complications related to the instillations but propose a retrograde pyelography before instillations are commenced to exclude contrast extravasation. This concept will need further evaluation in a randomised context [228]. 7.1.6.2. Bladder There are currently no data to support the use of bladder instillation of chemotherapy after kidney-sparing surgery as available RCTs included only patients who received RNU. 7.1.7. Recommendation for kidney-sparing management of localised low-risk UTUC RecommendationStrength ratingOffer kidney-sparing management as primary treatment option to patients with low-risk tumours.Strong 