6.3. Diagnostic evaluation. 6.3.1. Diagnostic investigations for bladder stones Plain X-ray of KUB has a reported sensitivity of 21%-78% for cystoscopically detected bladder stones in adults [710,727]. Larger (> 2.0 cm) stones are more likely to be radiopaque [727]. However, plain X-ray provides information on radio-opacity which may guide treatment and follow-up (see Section 3.2.3 X-ray characteristics, for further information). Ultrasound has a reported sensitivity and specificity of 20-83% and 98-100%, respectively for the detection of bladder stones in adults [728,729]. Computed tomography and cystoscopy have a higher sensitivity for detecting bladder stones than US or X-ray in adults [728,729]. No study compares cystoscopy and CT for the diagnosis of bladder stones. Cystoscopy has the advantage of detecting other potential causes for a patient’s symptoms (e.g., bladder cancer), whilst CT can also assess upper tract urolithiasis (see also section 3.2.3 X-ray characteristics) [730]. There is a paucity of evidence for the investigation of bladder stones, particularly in children [83,731]. See also Section 3.3 Diagnostic evaluation, for further information on diagnostic imaging for urolithiasis. The principle of ALARA should be applied, especially in children [732]. 6.3.2. Diagnosing the cause of bladder stones The cause of the bladder stone should be considered prior to bladder stone treatment as eliminating the underlying cause will reduce recurrence rates [733]. The following should be performed where possible prior to (or at the time of) bladder stone treatment: physical examination of external genitalia, and peripheral nervous system (including digital rectal examination, peri-anal tone, and sensation in men);uroflowmetry and post-void residual urine assessment;urine dipstick to include pH ± culture;metabolic assessment (see also section 3.3.2.3) including: serum (creatinine, (ionised) calcium, uric acid, sodium, potassium, blood cell count);urine pH;stone analysis: in first-time formers using a valid procedure (X-ray diffraction or infrared spectroscopy). The following investigations should also be considered for selected patients: upper tract imaging (in patients with a history of urolithiasis or loin pain);cysto-urethroscopy or urethrogram. 