6.5. Bladder stones follow-up. There are no studies examining the merits of differing follow-up modalities or frequencies following conservative, medical, or operative treatment of bladder stones in adults or children. Identification and prevention of the cause of bladder stone formation will be crucial to prevent recurrence (see section 6.3.2 Diagnosing the cause of bladder stones). In adults, there is a paucity of evidence on dietary modification or medical treatment for the prevention of bladder stone recurrence. Recommendations in the EAU Guideline on Urolithiasis, based on evidence from upper tract stones, constitute the best available recommendations, especially for migratory bladder stones (see Section 4 Metabolic Evaluation and Recurrence Prevention). Where it is possible to address the cause of secondary bladder stones (e.g., treatment of BPO), it is unclear whether metabolic intervention would offer any significant additional benefit in preventing stone recurrence. However, especially where the secondary cause cannot be addressed (e.g., indwelling catheter, neuropathic bladder, bladder augmentation, or urinary diversion); metabolic interventions are likely to reduce bladder stone recurrence rates. Regular bladder irrigation reduces the chances of bladder stone recurrence in adults and children with bladder augmentation or continent cutaneous urinary diversion and adults with spinal cord injury who perform CISC (see section 6.4.5 Special Situations) [767,772,797]. In children with primary (endemic) bladder stones maintenance of hydration, avoidance of diarrhoea, and a mixed cereal diet with milk and Vitamins A and B supplements, with the addition of eggs, meat, and boiled cows’ milk after one year of age are recommended to prevent a recurrence [723]. Finally, there are contradictory reports on a possible association between bladder calculi and the future development of bladder cancer [811-813]. The need for follow-up with regular cystoscopy therefore remains controversial. 