5.6.3. Conservative treatment. 5.6.3.1. Simple clinical interventions 5.6.3.1.1. Lifestyle interventions Examples of lifestyle factors that may be associated with UI include obesity, smoking, level of physical activity and diet. Modification of these factors may improve UI, but most of the evidence for these interventions come from studies with predominately female study populations. However, as many of these interventions are now generalised public health measures their recommendation is in line with general medical practice [607-609]. Current evidence does not allow to adequately personalise lifestyle interventions according to the type of UI. Modification of fluid intake, particularly restriction, is a strategy commonly used by people with UI to relieve symptoms. Advice on fluid intake given by healthcare professionals should be based on 24-hour fluid intake and urine output measurements. From a general health point of view, it should be advised that fluid intake should be sufficient to avoid thirst and that low or high 24-hour urine output should be investigated [607,610,611]. A cross-sectional population survey found no statistical association between caffeine intake and UI [612]. Conversely, an RCT showed that reduction of caffeine intake, associated with behavioural therapy, resulted in reduced urgency but not UI compared to behavioural therapy alone [613]. 5.6.3.1.2. Treatment of co-morbidities Urinary incontinence, especially in the elderly, has been associated with multiple co-morbid conditions [614]. It is possible that improvement of associated disease may reduce the severity of urinary symptoms. However, this is often difficult to assess as patients frequently suffer from more than one condition. Interventions may be combined and individualised, making it impossible to decide which alteration in an underlying disease has affected a patient’s UI. In patients with existing UI, particularly the elderly, it may be difficult or impossible to distinguish between the effects of medication, co-morbidities or ageing on UI. Although changing drug regimens for underlying diseases may be considered as a possible early intervention, there is limited evidence of benefit [615]. There is also a risk that stopping or altering medication may result in greater harm than benefit. 5.6.3.1.3. Constipation One RCT, with a majority female population, found that a multimodal intervention in elderly patients, involving assisted toileting, fluid intake, etc., reduced the occurrence of UI and constipation, while behavioural therapy appeared to improve both [616]. However, there is no evidence to show whether treating constipation improves UI, although both constipation and UI appear to be improved by certain behavioural interventions. 5.6.3.1.4. Containment Containment includes the use of absorbent pads, urinary catheters, external collection devices and penile clamps. A SR of six RCTs comparing different types of pads found that pads filled with super absorbent material were better than standard pads [617]. For men with light UI, a randomised crossover trial found that a leaf-shaped type of pad was preferred to rectangular pads [618]. A Cochrane review compared different types of long-term indwelling catheters and found no evidence that one catheter material or type of catheter was superior to another [619]. A SR of non-randomised studies found no differences in UTI outcome or Upper Urinary Tract (UUT) changes between use of suprapubic or urethral catheter drainage; however, patients with suprapubic catheters were less likely to have urethral complications [620]. For people using intermittent catheterisation, a Cochrane review found no evidence that one type of catheter or regimen of catheterisation was better than another [621]. An RCT in 56 men with post-prostatectomy incontinence (PPI) compared sheath drainage system, body-worn urinal, penile clamp, and absorbent pads. It was found that the three devices and absorbent pads have different strengths and limitations that make them more (or less) suitable for particular activities. Most men prefer to use a combination of devices and pads to meet their lifestyle needs. Hinge-type penile clamp was good for short vigorous activities as it was the most secure, least likely to leak and most discreet, although almost all men described it as uncomfortable or painful [622]. Summary of evidenceLEThere is limited evidence that lifestyle interventions e.g., weight reduction, smoking cessation or diet modification improves UI in males.3There is limited evidence that improving co-morbidities or changing drug regimens for underlying disease improves UI in males.3Pads and/or penile sheaths are palliative options for management of both SUI and UUI.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer lifestyle advice that may improve urinary incontinence (UI) to patients; however, patients should be informed that the evidence for these interventions is lacking.WeakReview any medication associated with the development or worsening of UI.WeakUse pads and/or penile sheaths as a palliative option for the management of UI.Weak 5.6.3.2. Behavioural and Physical therapies Behavioural and physical therapies encompass all treatments which require a form of self-motivated personal retraining by the patient and include techniques that are used to augment this effect. Usually in clinical practice, these will be introduced as part of a package of care including lifestyle changes, patient education, and possibly cognitive therapy as well. Further details for behavioural treatments are outlined in section 5.1.2 of these guidelines. 5.6.3.2.1. Prompted or timed voiding With prompted voiding, carers rather than the patient, initiate the decision to void. Two SRs confirmed a positive effect on continence outcomes for prompted voiding in comparison to standard care [623,624]. Timed voiding is defined as fixed, pre-determined, time intervals between toileting, applicable for those with or without cognitive impairment. A Cochrane review of timed voiding, included two RCTs, found inconsistent improvement in continence compared with standard care in cognitively impaired adults [625]. 5.6.3.2.2. Bladder training Bladder training goals are to correct faulty habit patterns of frequent urination, improve control over bladder urgency, prolong voiding intervals, increase bladder capacity, reduce incontinent episodes, and restore patient confidence in controlling bladder function. The ideal form or intensity of a BT program for UI is unclear. It is also unclear whether BT can prevent the development of UI. The addition of BT to anticholinergic therapy did not improve UI compared to antimuscarinics alone but it did improve frequency and nocturia [626]. In seven RCTs, BT was compared to drug therapy alone, and showed only a benefit for oxybutynin in cure and improvement of UI [626]. 5.6.3.2.3. Pelvic floor muscle training A 2015 Cochrane review concluded that there was no overall benefit at twelve months post-surgery for men who received post-operative pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) for the treatment of PPI and that the benefits of conservative treatment of PPI remain uncertain [627]. However, a subsequent SR and meta-analysis showed that PFMT either alone or in combination with biofeedback and/or electrical stimulation was effective for treating PPI, significantly reducing the time to continence recovery [628]. A further meta-analysis demonstrated that the addition of guided programs using biofeedback and/or pelvic floor muscle electric stimulation (PFES) significantly improved continence recovery rates at one- and three-month intervals post-surgery compared to PFMT alone [629]. Pelvic floor muscle training as soon as possible after surgery (I.e., between seven and ten days after the withdrawal of the urethral catheter) [630]. An RCT demonstrated that even a single-session of pre-operative PFMT with biofeedback from a dedicated pelvic floor physiotherapist, has beneficial effects on post-prostatectomy UI in the short term after surgery and is effective in improving LUTS related QoL in the long term [631,632] Two subsequent SRs in patients who underwent robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy demonstrated that the addition of PFMT to the post-operative management plan shorten the time to continence recovery [633,634]. Two RCTs have shown that written instructions alone offer similar levels of improvement to supervised PFMT [635,636]. One RCT found that PFMT was helpful in men who had been incontinent for at least one year after prostatectomy, and who had had no previous therapy [637]. One RCT compared PFMT to no treatment in men undergoing TURP. There was no demonstrable difference in the incidence of post-operative incontinence up to twelve months [638]. On the other hand, an RCT in men who underwent HoLEP, demonstrated that PFMT when started pre-operatively promoted early recovery of continence [639]. Other RCTs demonstrated that like PFMT, increased pelvic floor muscle strength and quicker return to continence may be achieved with the Pilates method [640], the oscillating rod [641], a combination of biofeedback with electrostimulation [642] and whole-body vibration training [643]. Furthermore, quicker return to continence and improved QoL may be achieved, even with extended and continuing nursing care [644] 5.6.3.2.4. Electrical stimulation The majority of evidence on electrical stimulation refers to women with SUI and many are generally low quality, with a variety of stimulation parameters, treatment regimens and outcome parameters [638]. An RCT of 70 PPI men receiving surface or intra-anal electrostimulation reported a significant reduction in UI in terms of grams of urine loss and a significant improvement in QoL from baseline, but no statistically significant difference between treatment arms [645]. A Cochrane review of six RCTs on electrical stimulation in men with UI concluded that there was some evidence that electrical stimulation enhanced the effect of PFMT in the short-term but not after six months. Electrical stimulation was also more effective than sham stimulation at six, but not twelve months; however, there were more adverse effects including pain and discomfort with electrical stimulation [646]. Electromagnetic stimulation has been promoted as a treatment for UI, but only weak evidence of the short- and long-term effects has been reported in SRs [647,648]. A more recent SR found insufficient evidence to suggest that electrical stimulation is beneficial for male patients with post-prostatectomy UI [649]. 5.6.3.2.5. Posterior tibial nerve stimulation Posterior tibial nerve stimulation (PTNS) has been studied as a treatment of UI, especially UUI. Electrical stimulation of the posterior tibial nerve delivers electrical stimuli to the sacral micturition centre via the S2-S4 sacral nerve plexus. Stimulation is done either percutaneously using a fine, 34-G, needle, inserted just above the medial aspect of the ankle (P-PTNS) or transcutaneously using surface electrodes (T-PTNS). Percutaneous-PTNS treatment cycles typically consist of twelve weekly treatments of 30 minutes and T-PTNS treatment cycles typically consists of self-administered, twenty-minute daily sessions, after adequate education. A female-predominant sham controlled RCT, assessed the effectiveness of PTNS in OAB population. There were 22.8% and 20% males in the treatment and sham arms, respectively [650]. Overactive bladder symptoms improved significantly in 54.5% of patients in the PTNS arm compared to 20.9% in the sham arm. A non-inferiority RCT comparing T-PTNS compared to P-PTNS, reported significant improvements in daytime frequency, urgency and UUI episodes without significant difference between treatment arms after twelve weeks of therapy [651]. A SR on T-PTNS in idiopathic and neurogenic female-predominant (males < 10%) population, reported significant improvement in OAB symptoms in 48-93% of patients and cure of UUI episodes in 25-45% [652]. For PTNS, mild pain and discomfort at the puncture site is the most common adverse event [653]. Small haematomas, swelling, leg tingling and vasovagal reaction to needle placement have also been reported [650]. Treatment adherence is generally high at 89.7% [651]. Contra-indications include a cardiac pacemaker and skin disease at the site of stimulation. There is some evidence that PTNS may benefit male patients with OAB, but due to too insufficient data, no recommendation on PTNS in males can be made at this time. However, considering the safety of this therapy, it can be offered to male patients as an alternative option prior to more invasive treatments. Summary of evidenceLEPrompted voiding, either alone or as part of a behavioural modification programme, improves continence in elderly, care-dependent people.1bThe combination of bladder training with antimuscarinic drugs does not result in greater improvement of UI but may improve frequency and nocturia.1bThere is conflicting evidence on whether the addition of BT, electrostimulation or biofeedback increases the effectiveness of PFMT alone.1bPre-operative PFMT does not confer additional benefit to men undergoing radical prostatectomy.1bElectrical stimulation may add benefit to PFMT up to six months.2There is limited evidence for the effectiveness of PTNS in male population.2There is no evidence that PTNS cures UUI in male population.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingImplement prompted voiding for patients with urinary incontinence (UI) where appropriate.StrongOffer bladder training as a complementary treatment for UI.WeakOffer pelvic floor muscle training alone or in combination with biofeedback and/or electrostimulation to men undergoing radical prostatectomy to speed recovery from UI.Weak 