5.6.6. Surgical treatment for urgency urinary incontinence. 5.6.6.1. Bladder wall injection of botulinum Toxin-A Mechanism of action: The primary mechanism of action of BoNT-A is through the inhibition of neurotransmitter release from cholinergic neurons [556]. OnabotulinumtoxinA (onabotA; BOTOX®) 100 U is licenced in Europe to treat OAB with persistent or refractory non-neurogenic UUI in adults [728,729]. Efficacy: An RCT of OAB-wet patients whose symptoms were not adequately managed with anticholinergics and who receive either bladder wall injections of onabotA (100 U) or saline reported a 50% reduction in UUI episodes/day whilst the number of micturitions/day reduced by more than two in patients receiving onabotA [730]. A total of 22.9% of the patients in the onabotA arm were fully dry, vs. 6.5% in the saline arm. A SR and meta-analysis comparing the efficacy of onabotA, mirabegron and anticholinergics in adults with idiopathic OAB reported that patients who received onabotA (100U) achieved greater reduction in UUI episodes, surgery, micturition frequency and the highest odds of achieving dryness as well as >50% reduction from baseline UUI episodes per day [731]. A randomised, placebo-controlled pilot study, assessing the effect of onabotA for the treatment of refractory OAB symptoms after prostatectomy reported significantly improved QoL and ICIQ scores and improvements in daily frequency in patients receiving onabotA compared to placebo [732]. A retrospective trial assessed onabotA efficacy in 65 non-obstructed men with refractory OAB and reported significant improvement in UDI-6 score (-4.2) and IIQ-7 (-6.0) scores, compared to baseline [733]. In a retrospective, single-centre cohort study of onabotA treatment for OAB in 120 patients lead to lower CISC rates in male patients after prior de-obstructive surgery than in surgery-naïve patients (28.6% CISC in the group without prior surgery, 7.5% in the TURP subgroup, and 4.2% in the radical prostatectomy subgroup) [734]. A phase IIIb trial randomised solifenacin-naive patients (10% males) with refractory OAB to onabotA, solifenacin or placebo, and showed that patients receiving onabotA had significantly greater changes in UUI episodes (-3.19) compared to solifenacin (-2.6) and placebo (-1.33) [735]. A network meta-analysis (male population range 9.8-40.2%) which compared onabotA to mirabegron demonstrated that onabotA was associated with improved outcomes in frequency episodes per day (-0.43,[-1.22-0.37]) and in UUI episodes per day (-0.46, [-1.46-0.53]) [736]. Tolerability and safety: Urinary retention and UTIs are the two most common adverse events after onabotA injection. Other reported adverse events include haematuria, dysuria and post-treatment pain [737]. Compared to mirabegron, onabotA is associated with higher risk for UTI and treatment emergent adverse events [736]. A retrospective analysis compared the use of CISC after onabotA injection, among men who had previous prostatectomy vs. those without prior surgery [734]. A 7.5% catheterisation rate after TURP, 4.2% rate after radical prostatectomy and 28.6% rate in men without prior prostate surgery was reported. Practical Considerations: BoNT-A injections is a recommended treatment option for men with refractory UUI. Despite the lack of a universally accepted injection protocol, gender specific studies and absence of studies in BPO patients, BoNT-A seems superior to medical therapy. It is associated with, higher UTIs and urinary retention risk coupled with the need for repeated injections. A dedicated series in male population, focused on treatment persistence, has shown a high discontinuation rate (68.8%) [738]. Patients treated for OAB with onabotA treatment that have not undergone prior de-obstruction are more likely to develop retention and subsequent CISC. Summary of evidenceLEA single treatment session of onabotA (100 U) injected in the bladder wall is more effective than placebo at curing and improving UUI/OAB symptoms and QoL.1bThere is no evidence that repeated injections of onabotA have reduced efficacy, but discontinuation rates are high.3There is an increased risk of urinary retention and UTI with onabotA injections.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer bladder wall injections of onabotulinumtoxinA (100 U) to patients with overactive bladder/urgency urinary incontinence refractory to medical therapy.WeakWarn patients of the limited duration of response, risk of urinary tract infection and the possible prolonged need for clean intermittent self-catheterisation (ensure that they are willing and able to do so).Strong 5.6.6.2. Sacral nerve stimulation (neuromodulation) Mechanism of action: Sacral neuromodulation (SNM) delivers low amplitude electrical impulses to the sacral nerve roots via an electrode implanted adjacent to the third sacral nerve root and connected to an attached pulse generator implanted in the buttock. It works by modulating neural activity thus stabilising bladder electrical activity through an unknown mechanism. It is a two-stage process: in the first stage, a tined lead electrode is placed percutaneously near the S3 (or if not found, near the S4) root and linked to an external stimulator to assess the response. If symptoms reduced more than 50%, patients are candidates for the second stage which is the full implant. Efficacy: Several trials assess the clinical effectiveness of SNM. All RCTs suffer from the limitation that patients and assessors cannot be blinded to the treatment allocation since all recruited subjects had to respond to a test phase before randomisation. In addition, the percentage of male population in these trials is around 10%. A meta-analysis compared the effectiveness of SNM to onabotA and reported no significant difference in successfully treated cases at six-month follow-up (RR 0.93; 95% CI: 0.63-1.39) [739]. Tolerability and safety: Main complications after SNM are pain at the implant site (13-42%), lead migration (4.0-21%), leg or back pain (3.0-18%) and wound infection (5.7-6.7%). Surgical revision is required in 29-33% of patients due to device malfunction, battery or device replacement or lead migration [740]. Practical Considerations: SNM represents an alternative to onabotA in patients with refractory OAB, as it has been shown good success rates and an acceptable safety profile. Summary of evidenceLESacral nerve neuromodulation is effective after failed conservative treatment for OAB/UUI, but no sham controls have been used.2a RecommendationStrength ratingOffer sacral neuromodulation to patients who have urgency urinary incontinence refractory to medical therapy and are willing to undergo surgical treatment.Weak 5.6.6.3. Cystoplasty/urinary diversion Mechanism of action: Augmentation cystoplasty involves the interposition of a detubularised segment of bowel into the bivalved bladder wall, aiming to increase bladder capacity and reduce OAB related symptoms. Urinary diversion remains a reconstructive option for patients with intractable UUI after multiple pelvic procedures, radiotherapy or pelvic pathology leading to irreversible sphincteric incompetence or fistula formation. Efficacy: There are no RCTs comparing bladder augmentation to other treatments for patients with refractory OAB/UUI. In a large study with three years follow-up augmentation cystoplasty resulted in a post-operative continence rate of 93% in idiopathic detrusor overactivity patients, 78% in neurogenic overactivity and up to 90% when an AUS was implanted, respectively [741]. The largest case series of bladder augmentation in an idiopathic population included only women [742]. At an average follow up of 75.4 months only 53% were continent and satisfied with the surgery, whereas 25% had occasional leaks and 18% continued to have disabling UUI. A small prospective mixed gender trial reported high patient satisfaction rates with augmentation cystoplasty vs. onabotA therapy [743]. A small study comparing ileal with colonic conduits concluded that there were no differences in the relative risks of UUT infection and uretero-intestinal stenosis [744]. However, there are no studies that have specifically examined these techniques in the treatment of intractable OAB/UUI [744]. Therefore, careful consideration on which operation is undertaken will depend on thorough pre-operative counselling, access to stoma/continence nurses as well as patient factors to allow for fully informed patient choice. Tolerability and safety: Cystoplasty and urinary diversion are major urological operations. The early post-operative complications include infection, bowel obstruction, bleeding, and cardiorespiratory complications. Long-term complications include metabolic disturbances (hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis if ileum is used), change in bowel habits, increased mucus production, stone formation, bladder perforation and rarely bladder cancer [745]. Following augmentation cystoplasty or diversion, the majority of patients will depend on self-catheterisation for bladder emptying. Patients with urinary conduit will depend on lifelong urine bags. Practical Considerations: Augmentation cystoplasty and urinary diversion represent realistic treatment options for men with refractory OAB. However, both options involve a major operation, with a non-negligible long-term complication rate and a lifelong reliance on catheterisation or urine bags. Figure 6. Evaluation and Management of Urinary Incontinence in non-neurogenic Male LUTS  DRE = digital-rectal examination; UI = urinary incontinence; UTI = urinary tract infection; PFMT = pelvic floor muscle training; PTNS = posterior tibial nerve stimulation; BPO = benign prostatic obstruction. Summary of evidenceLEThere is limited evidence of the effectiveness of augmentation cystoplasty and urinary diversion in treatment of idiopathic OAB.3The need to perform CISC following augmentation cystoplasty is high.3Augmentation cystoplasty and urinary diversion are associated with high risks of short- and long-term complications.3There is no evidence comparing the efficacy or adverse effects of augmentation cystoplasty to urinary diversion.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer augmentation cystoplasty to patients with overactive bladder (OAB)/urgency urinary incontinence (UUI) who have failed all other treatment options and are able and willing to perform self-catheterisation.WeakInform patients undergoing augmentation cystoplasty of the high risk of complications; the risk of having to perform clean intermittent self-catheterisation and the need for life-long surveillance.StrongOnly offer urinary diversion to patients who have failed less invasive therapies for the treatment of OAB/UUI, who will accept a stoma.Weak 