5.6.2. Diagnostic Evaluation. Medical history and physical examination of males with UI is the same as for male LUTS (Figure 2) and should allow UI to be categorised into SUI, UUI or MUI and to identify other types of UI (overflow UI, nocturnal enuresis), or those who need rapid referral to an appropriate specialist (e.g. pelvic diseases, neurological conditions). Specific validated questionnaires, such as the ICIQ-UI-SF, can help to quantify UI severity; however, a detailed description of the different urinary symptoms questionnaires and PROMs is beyond the scope of this guideline. For more information on available questionnaires see the 7th International Consultation on Incontinence (ICI) review on patient reported outcomes assessment [595]. Voiding diaries are a standardised method of measuring symptom severity, including frequency and extent of UI episodes, voided volume and 24-hour or nocturnal total urine volume [43]. Pad tests can be used to quantify severity of UI and to monitor patient’s response to treatment although the usefulness of these tests in differentiating between the different types of incontinence or predicting outcome of treatment is uncertain. Despite this, early post-operative testing with pad tests may predict future continence in men after radical prostatectomy [596,597]. Urodynamic testingUrodynamic studies allows for an objective characterisation of the type of UI and the identification of additional storage and/or voiding dysfunctions [598] UDS in patients with UI following BPO surgerySphincter weakness is the most common finding in incontinent men after BPO surgery. However, data coming mostly from case series and reviews, show that besides sphincter incompetence, other LUTD, assessed via UDS, play an incident role in post BPO surgery incontinence. Urodynamics has been performed in a retrospective study on 125 patients with incontinence after surgery for BPO. Sphincter insufficiency was the most common finding. However, also decreased detrusor compliance and DO have emerged as a cause of incontinence on urodynamic examination. Interestingly, both impaired detrusor contraction and DO alone were responsible for UI in 4 to 14% of patients [599]. UDS in patients with UI following radical prostatectomyAlso in this case, UI, is mainly due to sphincter deficiency. However, a SR on urodynamic findings in UI patients following radical prostatectomy, showed that while intrinsic urethral sphincter deficiency was reported as the sole cause of UI following radical prostatectomy in 8-71% of cases, it was variably associated with detrusor dysfunction in 0–88% of cases. In details, sphincter weakness was associated with DO in 0–100% of patients, with reduced bladder compliance in 18-58%, and with both DO and reduced bladder compliance in 4-64%. Interestingly, incontinent patients who did not complain of sphincter impairment showed detrusor dysfunction as follows: DO in 0-4%, reduced bladder compliance in 1-12%, DO plus impairment of bladder compliance in 1-7% [600]. UDS in patients with storage symptomsIn a retrospective evaluation of 668 urodynamic studies involving men with symptoms of urgency with or without urgency UI, DO was documented in 258 patients (38.6%) and 293 patients (43.9%) had evidence of BOO during PFS. The symptom UI correlated with the presence of DO [601]. The aforementioned evidence emphasises how urodynamic examination serves to clarify the origin of incontinence and the presence of any other associated LUTS. Unfortunately, the level of the evidence for the impact of UDS in the evaluation/management/outcome prediction of male patients with UI remains low [602] and does not allow us to produce any recommendations. Therefore, UDS should be considered in selected patients with UI or persistent/de novo LUTS/UI after surgery, mainly when invasive treatments are considered [603]. Post-void residual volume measurement can be applied with caution to men with non-neurogenic UI, as the prevalence, severity, and clinical application of PVR in men with UI is uncertain. However, a post-void residual measurement helps to distinguish overflow incontinence from other UI types [604]. Urethrocystoscopy can be performed in selected patients to exclude urethral or bladder neck strictures. Some tests have been proposed to evaluate any sphincter function e.g., repositioning tests but with poor reliability. The examination of the bladder helps to exclude tumours, stones, diverticula, that may exacerbate UI [605]. Imaging (US, MRI, CT scan) can improve the understanding of the anatomical and functional abnormalities that may cause UI and thus help its management [606]. Urinalysis: Reagent strip (‘dipstick’) urinalysis may indicate UTI, proteinuria, haematuria, or glycosuria, requiring further tests as recommended according to other EAU Guidelines, e.g., Guidelines on urinary tract cancers and urological infections [48-51]. Summary of evidenceLEValidated specific symptom score questionnaires and voiding diaries assist in the screening for and categorisation of UI.3Pad test can be used to quantify the presence and severity of UI, as well as a patient’s response to treatment.3There is limited evidence that urodynamics and PVR affect treatment choice in men with uncomplicated UI.3 RecommendationStrength ratingTake a complete medical history including symptoms and co-morbidities, medications, and a focused physical examination in the evaluation of men with urinary incontinence (UI).StrongUse a validated symptom score questionnaire, bladder diary and pad-test to assess UI.StrongMeasure post-void residual in the assessment of UI.StrongPerform urodynamics for UI when considering invasive treatment.Weak 