6.6.3. First-line hormonal treatment. Primary ADT has been the SOC for over 50 years [1034]. There is no high-level evidence in favour of a specific type of ADT for oncological outcomes, neither for orchiectomy nor for a LHRH agonist or antagonist. The level of testosterone is reduced much faster with orchiectomy and LHRH antagonist, therefore patients with impending spinal cord compression or other potential impending complications from the cancer should be treated with either a bilateral orchidectomy or LHRH antagonists as the preferred options. There is a suggestion in some studies and a SR and meta-analysis that cardiovascular side effects are less frequent in patients treated with LHRH antagonists than patients treated with LHRH agonists [1053,1097-1099]; therefore, patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease or other cardiovascular risk factors might be considered to be treated with antagonists if a chemical castration is chosen. 6.6.3.1. Non-steroidal anti-androgen monotherapy Based on a Cochrane review comparing older generation non-steroidal anti-androgen (NSAA) monotherapy to ADT (either medical or surgical), NSAA was considered to be less effective in terms of OS, clinical progression, treatment failure and treatment discontinuation due to AEs [1100] and is generally not recommended also because ADT-based combination treatments have become SOC. 6.6.3.2. Intermittent versus continuous androgen deprivation therapy Three independent reviews [1101-1103] and two meta-analyses [1104,1105] looked at the clinical efficacy of intermittent androgen deprivation (IAD) therapy. All of these reviews included eight RCTs of which only three were conducted in patients with exclusively M1 disease. So far, the SWOG 9346 is the largest trial addressing IAD in M1b patients [1106]. Of 3,040 screened patients, only 1,535 patients met the inclusion criteria. This highlights that only about 50% of M1b patients can be expected to be candidates for IAD, i.e. the best PSA responders. This was a non-inferiority trial leading to inconclusive results: the actual upper limit was above the pre-specified 90% upper limit of 1.2 (HR: 1.1, CI: 0.99–1.23), the pre-specified non-inferiority limit was not achieved, and the results did not show a significant inferiority for any treatment arm. However, based on this study inferior survival with IAD cannot be completely ruled out even in this highly selected subgroup. The use of intermittent ADT has been superseeded as continuous ADT based combination therapy has become SOC. 6.6.3.3. Early versus deferred androgen deprivation therapy Early treatment before the onset of symptoms is recommended in the majority of patients with metastatic hormone-sensitive disease despite lack of randomised phase III data in this specific setting and specifically not with the combination therapies that are standard nowadays. A Cochrane analysis from 2019 about the topic concluded that early ADT probably extends time to death of any cause and time to death from PCa [1107]. Since the analysis included only a very limited number of metastatic patients, the benefit of early ADT in this setting remains unproven. All of the trials testing the combination therapies in the metastatic hormone-sensitive setting also included asymptomatic patients. The only candidates with metastatic disease who may possibly be considered for deferred treatment are asymptomatic patients with a strong wish to avoid treatment-related side effects. The risk of developing symptoms, and even dying from PCa, without receiving the benefit from ADT with deferred treatment has been highlighted [1108,1109], but in the era before next generation imaging was used. Patients with deferred treatment for advanced PCa must be amenable to close follow-up. Another potential exception are patients with recurrent oligometastatic disease who have a strong wish to postpone the start of ADT (see Section 6.4.7). 