6.6.5. Treatment selection and patient selection. There have been several network meta-analyses of the published data concluding that combination therapy is more efficient than ADT alone, but none of the doublet combination therapies has been convincingly proven to be superior over another [1132-1137]. In a SR and meta-analysis looking at association between age and efficacy of combination therapy patients seemed to profit from combination therapy irrespective of age [1138]. As a consequence, patients should be offered combination treatment unless there are clear contra-indications or they present with asymptomatic disease and a very short life expectancy (based on non-cancer comorbidities). Since the data of the above mentioned Phase III trials of the triplet therapies have been reported, docetaxel as sole addition to ADT is not longer a valid option in the majority of patients if an androgen receptor pathway inhibitor (ARPI) is available and there are no contra-indications to use one. From subgroup analysis of all the above-mentioned RCTs we know that probably all subgroups (high vs. low volume/risk and synchronous vs. metachronous) can profit from the addition of an ARPI to ADT. Therefore, in view of the current data the recommendation is using ADT plus ARPI as the sole additional therapy or the triplet with an ARPI plus docetaxel. Formally the question what the added value of adding docetaxel to ADT plus an ARPI has not been evaluated, but since triplet therapy seems not to add a lot of unexpected overlapping toxicities, the data should be discussed with patients who are fit for chemotherapy and an ARPI, realising that most of the toxicity is caused by adding the chemotherapy. There is more evidence for using the triplet in synchronous disease and the OS benefit in PEACE-1 seemed to be driven mostly by the high volume patients at the time point of the analysis for the publication, in ARASENS only few patients had low volume disease. Of interest in some SRs and meta-analysis the authors found no significant difference for OS and/or PFS using the systemic triplet therapy compared to adding an ARPI alone to ADT [1135,1139-1141]. In contrast one meta-analysis suggested a benefit of systemic triplet therapy versus ADT and ARPI and another meta-analysis showed a benefit in patients with high volume disease [1136,1142]. In summary, the choice will most likely be driven by fitness for docetaxel, the nature of the disease (low/high volume; synchronous/metachronous), patient preference, the specific side effects, availability, logistics and cost. 