5.6.10. Erectile dysfunction after radical prostatectomy. The use of pro-erectile drugs following RP is important in achieving post-operative EF and allowing patients to resume sexual activity. Several trials have shown improvements in EF after RP in patients receiving drugs (any therapeutic or prophylactic) for ED. Early compared with delayed EF treatment affects the natural recovery time for EF [480], although there is limited data to support any specific regimen, which is either optimal for penile rehabilitation or may result in the achievement of spontaneous, non-pharmacologically assisted erections [289,481,482]. In prospective studies, there is no evidence that penile rehabilitation itself increases the chances of spontaneous recovery of EF in men following nerve-sparing RP (NSRP) [482]. The currently available therapeutic armamentarium follows the treatment algorithm for ED, which is shown in Figure 3. In this context, PDE5Is have been considered as the first-line therapy in patients who have undergone NS surgery, regardless of the surgical technique used [289,293]. Several clinical parameters have been identified as potential predictors of PDE5Is outcomes in men undergoing RP, i.e., patient age, baseline EF, and quality of NS technique are key factors in preserving post-RP EF [293,296,483]. A Cochrane review analysing data from eight RCTs showed that scheduled PDE5Is may have little or no effect on short-term (up to twelve months) self-reported potency when compared to placebo or no treatment [484]. In this study, a daily PDE5I made little to no difference in short- and long-term EF. The authors conclude that penile rehabilitation strategies using PDE5I following RP do not increase self-reported EF compared to on-demand use. Intracavernous injections and penile implants have been traditionally suggested as second- and third-line treatments, respectively, when oral PDE5Is are not adequately effective or not suitable for post-operative patients [289,485]. A meta-analysis showed that the early use of VED has an excellent therapeutic effect on post-RP patients and no serious adverse effects, therefore it should be considered as a therapeutic alternative [486]. Findings from two network meta-analyses showed that combination therapy with VED and PDE5is offers clear advantages over monotherapy, even in post-RP patients; therefore, this combined approach should be considered in the clinical management of ED after RP [487]. Findings from a systematic review suggested that pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) combined with bio-feedback is a promising alternative to pharmacological treatments, although there is a need for future well-powered, rigorously designed RCTs to draw strong conclusions [488]. 