5.6.8. Innovative treatment modalities. There are currently several potential novel treatment modalities for ED. Most of these therapeutic approaches require further investigation in large-scale, blinded, placebo-controlled randomised studies to achieve adequate evidence-based and clinically-reliable recommendation grades [432-437]. 5.6.8.1. Regenerative medicine therapies 5.6.8.1.1. Shockwave therapy The use of low-intensity extracorporeal shock wave therapy (Li-SWT) has been increasingly proposed as a treatment for vasculogenic ED over the last decade, and it’s the only currently marketed treatment that might offer a cure, which is the most desired outcome for most men suffering from ED [328,438-445]. Overall, several single-arm trials have shown a beneficial effect of Li-SWT on patient-reported EF, but data from prospective randomised trials are conflicting, and many questions remain to be answered due to the heterogeneity among shockwave generators, type of shockwaves delivered, set-up parameters and treatment protocols [446,447]. In a trial trying to assess the best treatment parameters, no significant differences were observed between various energy flux density levels; although, a 0.10 mJ/mm2 seems to perform slightly better than lower energies [448]. Most of the studies have suggested that Li-SWT can significantly increase IIEF and EHS scores in patients with mild vasculogenic ED, although this improvement appears modest and the rates of patients reporting a satisfactory improvement range between 40-80% [328,446]. Few studies have shown an improvement in penile haemodynamic parameters after Li-SWT, but the clinical meaning of this improvement remains unclear [446,449]. Likewise, data suggest that Li-SWT could ameliorate erection quality even in patients with severe ED who are either PDE5Is non-responders [443,450,451] or inadequate responders [452], thus reducing the immediate need for more invasive treatments. Treatment effect appears to be clinically evident starting from one to three months after treatment completion, with a subsequent progressive decrease of the achieved benefit in terms of EF over time, although some effects could be still detected up to five years after treatment [446,448,453]. Data from RCTs suggests that even better results could be achieved by combining Li-SWT with other treatments such as a VED in men with T2DM [454] or daily tadalafil [455,456]. Findings from a recent meta-analysis showed that LI-ESWT has a positive effect on early recovery of EF in the context of penile rehabilitation of ED after RP. However, the authors clearly outlined that the level of evidence was low; therefore, careful interpretation of the results is required [457-459]. 5.6.8.1.2. Platelet-Rich Plasma Intracavernous injection of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) has been investigated in several prospective and retrospective trials [460-466]. The regenerative effect of PRP is deemed to be exerted through the high concentrations of platelets containing several growth factors including VEGF, EGF, IGF-1, PDGF and FGF [467]. These factors may be responsible for angiogenesis stimulation and stem cell recruitment [467]. In the first RCT investigated the effect of intracavernous injection of PRP for ED, 60 patients with mild to moderate vasculogenic ED were randomised to receive two injections of 10 mL PRP (n=30) or placebo (n=30) [466]. At one, three and six-month follow-up, the rate of patients reporting minimal clinically important difference (MCID) in the IIEF-EF score was significantly higher in the treatment group, with 69% achieving MCID six months after PRP vs. 27% in the placebo group (p < 0.001). IIEF-EF scores improved by a mean of 2.7 points at one-month and 3.9 points at six-month assessment after treatment. Regarding safety, no haemorrhagic events or other side effects were reported [466]. A prospective randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was carried out on 109 patients, aged 45-65 years, with mild to moderate ED, following cessation of any ED treatment [468]. At one, three and six months after PRP injections, patients in the PRP group had a significant improvement compared to placebo in terms of IIEF-EF, SEP2 and SEP3. Moreover, at six months post-treatment follow-up, 70% of patients achieved an MCID in the PRP group compared to 16% in the placebo group [468]. Even more recently, a further prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-control study on a relatively small cohort of mild to moderate ED patients who have been treated with two PRP injections separated by one month showed that the treatment is safe, but the authors did not find any difference in efficacy between PRP and placebo [469]. Of clinical relevance, patients were allowed to keep PDE5is during the study [469]. As a whole, despite a number of promising results that have been obtained for the treatment of primary organic ED in terms of both efficacy and safety of PRP, the available evidence is still insufficient to provide a recommendation regarding the use of PRP for ED treatment in clinical practice [470]. In this context, an important heterogeneity among studies still exists in terms of timing and dosing regimens, with no consensus regarding the optimal activation method and platelet concentration for each PRP injection, and the need to measure qualitative and quantitative composition of growth factors and cytokines [470,471]. Therefore, intracavernous injection of PRP should be used only in a clinical trial setting, as larger trials are needed to confirm original findings and define the efficacy and safety of PRP for ED. 5.6.8.1.3. Stem-cells The use of stem cells as a regenerative treatment for ED is currently under investigation. A systematic review has concluded that five completed human clinical trials have shown promise for stem cell therapy as a restorative treatment for ED [472]. However, data are still insufficient for providing a clinical recommendation. 5.6.8.2. Botulinum Neurotoxin Botulinum Neurotoxin A (BoNT-A) has been investigated as a possible ED treatment [473]. Two RCTs have investigated the effect of BoNT-A for the treatment of patients with ED who were non-responders to PDE5Is or ICI pro-erectile drugs [474,475]. One trial randomised 70 patients with ED refractory to PDE5Is to receive a single ICI of 100 UI of BoNT-A or saline [474]. Patients in both groups were instructed to keep using on-demand high-dose PDE5Is. The RCT showed an improvement in EHS and PSV at two weeks post-treatment. At six weeks the treatment group showed a 5 points improvement in the SHIM score vs. no improvement in the placebo group, with 53% of patients reporting an erection hard enough for vaginal penetration [474]. The second trial randomised 176 patients, all non-responders to PDE5Is or ICI trimix, to three treatment groups: BoNT-A 100 UI; BoNT-A 50 UI; or placebo [475]. A significant improvement in SHIM, EHS and SEP scores was reported in both treatment groups with a maximum response rate being reacted three months after treatment. Overall, the RCT showed that up to 40% of patients were able to resume satisfactory sexual activity after treatment [475]. Both trials reported only mild local side-effects with no systemic complications. Other single-arm, non-controlled studies have confirmed these findings [476,477]; therefore, showing a promising role for BoNT-A in the treatment of patients who are non-responders to well-established ED therapies. However, at present no recommendation for its use in clinical practice can be provided as larger trials are needed to confirm original findings and define the efficacy and safety of BoNT-A for ED. 