7.4.2. Targeted therapies. In sporadic ccRCC, HIF accumulation due to VHL-inactivation results in overexpression of VEGF and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), which promote neo-angiogenesis [531-533]. This process substantially contributes to the development and progression of RCC. Several targeting drugs for the treatment of mRCC are approved in both the USA and Europe. Most published trials have selected for clear-cell carcinoma subtypes, thus no robust evidencebased recommendations can be given for non-ccRCC subtypes. In major trials leading to registration of the approved targeted agents, patients were stratified according to the IMDC risk model (see chapter 6.6 on prognostic models) [269]. 7.4.2.1. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors 7.4.2.1.1. Sunitinib Sunitinib is an oral TKI inhibitor and has anti-tumour and anti-angiogenic activity. First-line monotherapy with sunitinib demonstrated significantly longer PFS compared with IFN-α. Overall survival was greater in patients treated with sunitinib (26.4 months) vs. IFN-α (21.8 months) despite crossover [534]. In the EFFECT trial, sunitinib 50 mg/day (four weeks on/two weeks off) was compared with continuous uninterrupted sunitinib 37.5 mg/day in patients with clear cell metastatic renal cell carcinoma (cc-mRCC) [535]. No significant differences in OS were seen (23.1 vs. 23.5 months, p = 0.615). Toxicity was comparable in both arms. Because of the non-significant, but numerically longer time to progression with the standard 50 mg dosage, the authors recommended using this regimen. Alternate scheduling of sunitinib (two weeks on/one week off) is being used to manage toxicity, but robust data to support its use is lacking [536,537]. 7.4.2.1.2. Pazopanib Pazopanib is an oral angiogenesis inhibitor. In a trial of pazopanib vs. placebo in treatment-naive mRCC patients and cytokine-treated patients, a significant improvement in PFS and tumour response was observed [538]. A non-inferiority trial comparing pazopanib with sunitinib (COMPARZ) established pazopanib as an alternative to sunitinib. It showed that pazopanib was not associated with significantly worse PFS or OS compared to sunitinib. The two drugs had different toxicity profiles, and QoL was better with pazopanib pazopanib [539]. In another patient-preference study (PISCES), patients preferred pazopanib to sunitinib (70% vs. 22%, p < 0.05) due to symptomatic toxicity [540]. Both studies were limited in that intermittent therapy (sunitinib) was compared with continuous therapy (pazopanib). 7.4.2.1.3. Axitinib Axitinib is an oral selective second-generation inhibitor of VEGFR-1, -2, and -3. Axitinib was first evaluated as second-line treatment. In the AXIS trial, axitinib was compared to sorafenib in patients who had previously failed cytokine treatment or targeted agents (mainly sunitinib) [541]. The overall median PFS was greater for axitinib than sorafenib. Axitinib was associated with a greater PFS than sorafenib (4.8 vs. 3.4 months) after progression on sunitinib. Axitinib showed grade 3 diarrhoea in 11%, hypertension in 16%, and fatigue in 11% of patients. Final analysis of OS showed no significant differences between axitinib or sorafenib [542]. In a randomised phase III trial of axitinib vs. sorafenib in first-line treatment-naive cc-mRCC, a significant difference in median PFS between the treatment groups was not demonstrated, although the study was underpowered, raising the possibility of a type II error [543]. As a result of this study, axitinib is not approved for first-line therapy. 7.4.2.1.4. Cabozantinib Cabozantinib is an oral inhibitor of tyrosine kinase, including MET, VEGF and AXL. Cabozantinib was investigated in a phase I study in patients resistant to VEGFR and mTOR inhibitors demonstrating objective responses and disease control [232]. Based on these results an RCT investigated cabozantinib vs. everolimus in patients with ccRCC failing one or more VEGF-targeted therapies (METEOR) [544,545]. Cabozantinib delayed PFS compared to everolimus in VEGF-targeted therapy refractory disease (HR: 0.58, 95% CI: 0.45-0.75) [544] (LE: 1b). The median OS was 21.4 months (95% CI: 18.7 to not estimable) with cabozantinib and 16.5 months (95% CI: 14.7-18.8) with everolimus in VEGF-resistant RCC. The HR for death was 0.66 (95% CI: 0.53-0.83, p = 0.0003) [500]. Grade III or IV adverse events were reported in 74% with cabozantinib and 65% with everolimus. Adverse events were managed with dose reductions; doses were reduced in 60% of the patients who received cabozantinib. The Alliance A031203 CABOSUN randomised phase II trial comparing cabozantinib and sunitinib in first-line in 157 intermediate- and poor-risk patients favoured cabozantinib for RR and PFS, but not OS [546,547]. Cabozantinib significantly increased median PFS (8.2 vs. 5.6 months, adjusted HR: 0.66, 95% CI: 0.46 to 0.95; one-sided p = 0.012). Objective response rate was 46% (95% CI: 34-57) for cabozantinib vs. 18% (95% CI: 10-28) for sunitinib. All-causality grade III or IV adverse events were similar for cabozantinib and sunitinib. No difference in OS was seen. Due to limitations of the statistical analyses within this trial, the evidence is inferior over existing choices. 7.4.2.1.5. Lenvatinib Lenvatinib is an oral multi-target TKI of VEGFR1, VEGFR2, and VEGFR3, with inhibitory activity against fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, and FGFR4), platelet growth factor receptor (PDGFRα), re-arranged during transfection (RET) and receptor for stem cell factor (KIT). It has recently been investigated in a randomised phase II study in combination with everolimus vs. lenvatinib or everolimus alone (see Section 7.4.4.1.1 for discussion of results) [548]. 7.4.2.1.6. Tivozanib Tivozanib is a potent and selective TKI of VEGFR1, VEGFR2, and VEGFR3 and was compared in two phase III trials with sorafenib in patients with mRCC [549,550]. Tivozanib was approved by the EMA in front-line mRCC. While it was associated with a PFS advantage in both studies, no OS advantage was seen. In view of the choice of sorafenib as the control arm in the front-line trial, the Panel considers there is too much uncertainty, and too many attractive alternatives, to support its use in this front-line setting. 7.4.2.2. Monoclonal VEGF antibody Bevacizumab is a humanised monoclonal antibody. Initial first-line treatment in combination with IFN-α has been superseded by more effective therapies [551-553]. Bevacizumab in combination with atezolizumab has not been approved for treatment of mRCC (see Section 7.4.3.2) [554]. 7.4.2.3.mTOR inhibitors 7.4.2.3.1. Temsirolimus Temsirolimus is a specific inhibitor of mTOR [555]. Its use has been superseded as front-line treatment option. 7.4.2.3.2. Everolimus Everolimus is an oral mTOR inhibitor, which is established in the treatment of VEGF-refractory disease. The RECORD-1 study compared everolimus plus best supportive care (BSC) vs. placebo plus BSC in patients with previously failed anti-VEGFR treatment (or previously intolerant of VEGF-targeted therapy) [556]. The data showed a median PFS of 4 vs. 1.9 months for everolimus and placebo, respectively [556]. The Panel consider, even in the absence of conclusive data, that everolimus may present a therapeutic option in patients who were intolerant to, or previously failed, immune- and VEGFR-targeted therapies (LE: 4). Recent phase II data suggest adding lenvatinib is attractive. 7.4.2.4. Small molucule inhibitor 7.4.2.4.1. Belzutifan Belzutifan is an inhibitor of the HIF2a transcription factor with single agent activity ccRCC. Initial Phase I/II trials in 55 patients confirmed objective response rate was 25% (all partial responses), and the median progression-free survival was 14.5 months. The most common grade ≥3 adverse events were anemia (27%) and hypoxia (16%) [59]. In the randomised phase III LITESPARK 005, it shows a progression free survival advantage over everolimus in heavily pretreated ccRCC. It has a favorable adverse event profile. It should be considered as an attractive alternative to everolimus in this setting. Overall survival is awaited as are the results of a number of combination studies [557]. 7.4.2.5. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) targeted therapy Intermittent VEGF targeted therapy is attractive for patients on long term therapy, due to the chronic toxicity associated with long term therapy such as fatigue. It has been tested with sunitinib or pazopainib in a phase III study and found to be safe [558]. Patients in the study had stable disease (or better) for at least six months after staring therapy. They were closely followed for progression with cross sectional imaging. Cessation of therapy was associated with higher rates of progression but no detrimental effect was seen on OS [558]. Intermittent therapy has not been tested with VEFG/PD-1 combinations, therefore its application in the modern 1st line setting is unknown, but extrapolation suggests it should be safe. 7.4.2.6. Summary of evidence and recommendations for single-agent targeted therapy in metastaticclear-cell RCC Summary of evidenceLESingle-agent VEGF-targeted therapy has been superseded by immune checkpoint-based combination therapy.1bIntermittent VEGF therapy can be considered in patients on long term VEGF targeted therapy2IO-VEGFR TKI combination estblished RR and PFS benefot over single agent VEGFR TKI but no OS benefit in subgroup analysis.1aPazopanib is non-inferior to sunitinib as first-line management option in mRCC.1bCabozantinib in intermediate- and poor-risk treatment-naive ccRCC leads to better response rates and PFS but not OS when compared to sunitinib.2bTivozanib has been EMA approved in first-line setting.3Single-agent VEGF-targeted therapies are preferentially recommended after first-line PD-L1-based combinations. Re-challenge with treatments already used should be avoided.3Single-agent cabozantinib or nivolumab are superior to everolimus after one or more lines of VEGF-targeted therapy.1bEverolimus prolongs PFS after VEGF-targeted therapy when compared to placebo. This is no longer widely recommended before third-line therapy.1bBelzutifan has a progression free survial advantage over everolimus in second and more lines pretreated clear cell renal cancer.1bLenvatinib in combination with everolimus improved PFS over everolimus alone in VEGF-refractory disease. Its role after ICIs is uncertain. There is a lack of robust data on this combination making its recommendation challenging.2a RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer nivolumab or cabozantinib for immune checkpoint inhibitor-naive vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)-refractory clear-cell metastatic renal cell carcinoma (cc-mRCC) after one or two lines of therapy.StrongSequencing the agent not used as second-line therapy (nivolumab or cabozantinib) for third-line therapy is recommended.WeakOffer VEGF-tyrosine kinase inhibitors as second-line therapy to patients refractory to nivolumab plus ipilimumab or axitinib plus pembrolizumab or cabozantinib plus nivolumab or lenvatinib plus pembrolizumab.WeakOffer cabozantinib after VEGF-targeted therapy in cc-mRCC.StrongSequence systemic therapy in treating mRCC.StrongOffer immune checkpoint inhibitor combination therapy for advanced cc-mRCC with sarcomatoid features.WeakOffer belzutifan as an alternative to everolimus in patients previously treated with second to fourth line therapy for clear cell renal carcinoma.WeakIntermittent single agent VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor can be offered in case of partial response or stable disease > 6 months.Weak 