4.1.4.1.5.4. Electrical stimulation. The methods of delivery of electrical stimulation (ES) vary considerably. Electrical stimulation of the PFM can also be combined with other forms of conservative therapy, e.g., PFMT with and without biofeedback. Electrical stimulation is often used to assist women who cannot initiate contractions to identify their PFMs and in patients with OAB and UUI with the aim of inhibiting detrusor contraction. There is, however, a lack of basic and mechanistic studies to confirm this theory. A SR of the effect of ES included 63 trials with 4,224 adults with OAB symptoms [148]. Moderate-quality evidence suggests that ES is more likely to improve OAB symptoms compared to sham control, no treatment, PFMT, and drug treatment. It was unclear if ES was more effective than placebo/sham for UUI. Insufficient or very low-quality evidence was available to determine the difference in the adverse event rates between ES and placebo/sham and the other active treatments. A SR of nine studies compared the effects different techniques of electrical stimulation. Pooled analysis of three trials showed no difference between intravaginal stimulation and transcutaneous posterior tibial nerve stimulation (T-PTNS) in terms of urinary frequency, nocturia and QoL scores [149]. In the same review, pooled results from two studies which T-PTNS was compared with posterior tibial nerve stimulation (PTNS) showed no difference in urinary urgency, frequency and QoL scores [149]. 4.1.4.1.5.4.1.Posterior tibial nerve stimulation Electrical stimulation of the posterior tibial nerve delivers electrical stimuli to the sacral micturition centre via the S2–S4 nerve roots. Stimulation is percutaneous with a fine (34-G) needle, inserted just above the medial aspect of the ankle (P-PTNS). Transcutaneous stimulation is also available that delivers stimulation via surface electrodes that do not penetrate the skin. The optimal treatment schedule has not been determined, with daily and weekly regimens described [150]. A SR identified five RCTs (408 women) that compared PTNS with antimuscarinics. The PTNS techniques were significantly more effective than antimuscarinics in the reduction of UUI episodes with no significant difference in the reduction of overall symptoms score, frequency episodes or urgency episodes [11]. A SR of three studies comparing PTNS monotherapy with PTNS plus antimuscarinics, showed that the combination therapy added no statistically significant difference to PTNS monotherapy in the reduction of mean symptoms score, frequency episodes, nocturia episodes, or UUI episodes [11]. 4.1.4.1.5.4.2.Percutaneous posterior tibial nerve stimulation The reviewed studies included a SR, two twelve-week RCTs of P-PTNS compared with sham treatment [151-153], one RCT comparing PTNS to tolterodine, and a three-year extension trial utilising a maintenance protocol in patients with OAB [154,155]. The results of studies of PTNS in women with OAB consistently showed significant and sustained improvement in symptoms from baseline, with similar improvement compared to treatment with tolterodine. 4.1.4.1.5.4.3.Transcutaneous posterior tibial nerve stimulation A SR of thirteen trials (ten RCTs and three cohort studies) compared the efficacy of T-PTNS (duration four to twelve weeks) with sham treatment, anticholinergics, and exercise in treatment of adults with OAB symptoms [156]. Of note, the populations were adult women and men, and some studies included patients with neurogenic OAB. Meta-analysis was possible in two RCTs comparing T-PTNS with sham treatment and revealed mean reduction in total International Consultation on Incontinence modular questionnaire (ICIQ) Urinary Incontinence Short Form (ICIQ-UI-SF) associated with T-PTNS of −3.79 points. A small RCT compared T-PTNS plus standard treatment (PFMT and BT) with PFMT and BT alone in older women [157]. Women in the T-TPNS group were more likely to achieve improvement. A small RCT compared BT alone, BT plus P-PTNS and BT plus T-PTNS in women with idiopathic OAB. Both P-PTNS and T-PTNS were more effective than BT alone. These two tibial nerve stimulation methods had similar clinical efficacy but with slight differences: T-PTNS had shorter preparation time, less discomfort level and higher patient satisfaction than P-PTNS [158]. 