4.1.4.1.3. Urinary containment. Urinary containment is important for people with OAB wet when active treatment does not cure the problem, is delayed, or when it is not available or possible. Some individuals may prefer urinary containment rather than active treatment with its associated risks. Containment includes the use of absorbent pads, urinary catheters, external collection devices and intravaginal devices. Detailed literature summaries can be found in the current International Consultation on Urological Diseases (ICUD) monograph [8] and in a European Association of Urology Nurses guidance document [117]. A SR of five RCTs comparing different types of pads found that pads filled with superabsorbent material were better than standard pads but evidence that disposable pads in preventing skin problems, were better than washable pads was inconsistent [118]. A series of three crossover RCTs examined performance of different pad designs for differing populations [119]. For women with light UI, disposable insert pads (within washable pouch pants) were most effective. In adults with moderate/severe UI, disposable pull-up pants were more effective for women. A Cochrane review summarised three RCTs comparing different types of long-term indwelling catheters and found no evidence that one catheter material or type of catheter was superior to another [120]. A SR of non-randomised studies found no differences in UTI outcome or UUT changes between use of suprapubic or urethral catheter drainage; however, patients with suprapubic catheters were less likely to have urethral complications [121]. Catheter-related bladder discomfort may be significant in women. Anticholinergics have been proposed to prevent or reduce this issue, but most of the evidence comes from clinical trials in the postoperative period, and the results are conflicting [122-125]. One retrospective study including 40 women (most of them neurogenic) with long-term bladder catheters found intravesical botulinum toxin injections helped to prevent bladder pain and discomfort and catheter bypass/leakage. Patients reported an improvement in QoL and a significant 83% reduction in urine leakage [126]. A Cochrane review summarising five trials comparing bladder washout policies in adults with indwelling urinary catheters found inconsistent evidence of benefit [127]. A Cochrane review summarising eight trials of whether antibiotic prophylaxis was beneficial for adults using clean intermittent self-catheterisation (CISC) or indwelling catheterisation found it reduced the incidence of symptomatic UTI but possible harms were not assessed [128]. A multicentre RCT from the UK involving patients practising CISC reported that prophylaxis reduced UTI incidence and was well-tolerated, but development of antibiotic resistance was a concern [129]. 