5.2.2. Analgesics. If the use of simple analgesics fails to provide adequate benefit, then consider using neuropathic agents, and if there is no improvement, consider involving a specialist pain management centre with an interest in pelvic pain. Chronic pelvic pain is well defined and involves multiple mechanisms as described in previous sections. The management requires a holistic approach with biological, psychological and social components. Few studies have specifically looked at medications used in CPPPS [428], therefore, a wider look at the literature has been undertaken and further specific research is required. The agents concerned are divided for ease of description. Combinations often provide a greater benefit than individual agents [429]. They may also allow lower individual dosages and thus minimise side-effects. The aim of using these drugs is to allow patients to improve their QoL. This is best measured by assessing their function as well as pain severity. If the use of these agents does not allow this, then they should be withdrawn. Unfortunately, the failure of one agent does not exclude potential benefit of an alternative. If the benefit is limited by side-effects, then the lowest effective dose should be found (by dose titration). Sometimes, patients will prefer a higher level of pain and have fewer side effects. 5.2.2.1. Mechanisms of action Mechanisms of action are discussed as appropriate under the drug headings below. 5.2.2.2. Comparisons within and between groups in terms of efficacy and safety Paracetamol (acetaminophen) Paracetamol is a well-tolerated analgesic in a class of its own. This is an antipyretic analgesic with a central mechanism of action [430]. It is often available over the counter without prescription. A review questions its routine use as a first-line analgesic based on inadequate evidence of efficacy in many pain conditions including dysmenorrhoea [431]. It will not be effective for all patients and individual responses should be reviewed when deciding on longer term use. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents These agents are anti-inflammatory, antipyretic analgesics that act by inhibiting the enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX). They have a peripheral effect, hence their use in conditions involving peripheral or inflammatory mechanisms. They are commonly used for pelvic pain; many are available over the counter and are usually well-tolerated. There is insufficient evidence to suggest one NSAID over another for pelvic pain. Guidelines for use of NSAIDs and COX-2 selective agents have been developed. They have more side-effects than paracetamol, including indigestion, headaches and drowsiness. The evidence for their benefit in chronic pelvic pain is weak or non-existent and is often limited by side-effects. For pelvic pain in which inflammatory processes are considered important, such as dysmenorrhoea [432], NSAIDs are more effective than placebo and paracetamol, but with a higher incidence of side-effects. For pelvic pain in which central mechanisms may be incriminated, such as endometriosis [433] then the evidence is lacking for NSAIDs despite their common use. At a practical level, if NSAIDs are considered for use, they should be tried (having regard for the cautions and contraindications) and the patient reviewed for improvement in function as well as analgesia. If this is not achieved, or side-effects are limiting, then they should be withdrawn. Neuromodulators These agents are not simple analgesics but used to modulate neuropathic or centrally mediated pain. There are several classes commonly used with recognised benefits in pain medicine. They are taken on a regular basis and all have side-effects that may limit their use and have the potential to be dependence-forming. In the UK, NICE has reviewed the pharmacological management of neuropathic pain [434]. The evidence for treatment of CPPPS is lacking but is present for other painful conditions. For this chapter, most of the evidence is from non-pelvic pain sources. The general method for using these agents is by titrating the dose against benefit and side-effects. The aim is for patients to have an improvement in their QoL, which is often best assessed by alterations in their function. It is common to use these agents in combination but studies comparing different agents against each other, or in combination, are lacking. Some of these agents are also used for specific conditions. Early identification of neuropathic pain with a simple questionnaire could facilitate targeted therapy with neuromodulators [58]. AntidepressantsTricyclic antidepressants The tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have multiple mechanisms of action and are frequently limited by their side-effects. Tricyclic antidepressants have a long history of use in pain medicine and have been subjected to a Cochrane review [435], suggesting that they are effective for neuropathic pain. Amitriptyline is the most commonly used at doses from 10-75 mg/day (sometimes rising to 150 mg/day). This is titrated against benefit or side-effects and should be taken at night [434]. Nortriptyline and imipramine are used as alternatives. Other Antidepressants Duloxetine is a SNRI antidepressant licensed for use in depression, SUI and neuropathic pain. There is evidence of benefit in diabetic neuropathy and fibromyalgia at a dose of 60 mg/day [436,437]. Side-effects are common and may result in its discontinuation. Anticonvulsants Anticonvulsants are commonly used in the management of neuropathic pain. There are general studies and some looking more particularly at pelvic pain. Individual agents have been systematically reviewed. Their use is suggested in the NICE Neuropathic Pain Guidelines [434]. Carbamazepine has a long history of use in neuropathic pain. Evidence exists for its benefit [438]. Trials trend to be of short duration, showing only moderate benefit. There are side-effects; some of which may be serious. It is no longer a first choice agent. Other anticonvulsant agents are available with fewer serious side-effects. GabapentinoidsThere is a growing awareness and evidence of the risk for dependence and misuse of gabapentinoids [439]. A formal assessment of efficacy against benefit and side-effects (both pain and QoL) is required with the patient in order to determine the lowest effective dose and if longer-term treatment is to be used. Gabapentin is commonly used for neuropathic pain and has been systematically reviewed [440,441]. This demonstrates good evidence for postherpetic neuralgia and diabetic neuropathy but evidence for other neuropathies is limited. A double-blind RCT looking at CPPPS in women with no obvious pathology demonstrated no benefits but higher levels of side effect [441]. Pregabalin is a commonly used neuromodulator with good evidence of efficacy in some neuropathic conditions [442]. The dose for benefit is in the range of 300-600 mg/day. Evidence for central neuropathic pains is inadequate. Some patients do gain moderate to significant benefit but most will gain no benefit and then the drug should be discontinued. Other agents can be used in the management of neuropathic pain but they are best administered by specialists in the management of pain whom are familiar with their use. They tend to be considered after the standard options have been exhausted. As with all good pain management, they are used as part of a comprehensive multi-dimensional management plan. Opioids Over recent years opioids have been used extensively for managing chronic non-cancer pain. There is increasing evidence that their role is limited in this population, but may be beneficial for a small number of patients at a low dose in a managed setting [443]. There is clear evidence of harm and significant professional, public and political interest. Their use is beneficial for both acute pain and for cancer pain management particularly towards the end of life. Often patients will stop taking oral opioids due to side effects or insufficient analgesic effect [444]. There is clear evidence of harm including effects on the endocrine and immune systems as well as a growing understanding of opioid-induced hyperalgesia [445]. There is limited guidance on the best method for tapering the dose of opioids with the aim of stopping or finding the lowest effective dose [446]. Opioids should only be used in conjunction with a management plan with consultation between clinicians experienced in their use. It is suggested that a pain management unit should be involved along with the patient and their primary care physician. Ensure there are arrangements for formal monitoring, follow-up and review. If opioids are used and the pain remains, then they are not working and should be stopped even if there is no alternative [445]. The risk of harm increases substantially at doses above 120 mg/day morphine equivalence [445] and guidance suggests regular (at least annual) review for patients with over 50 mg/day morphine equivalence and pain specialist involvement above 90 mg/day morphine equivalence [447]. There are well-established guidelines for the use of opioids in pain management as well as considering the potential risks [445,447]. Opioid reduction and optimisation should be undertaken where opioids are not providing clear measurable benefit. There is also information available online for patients [445]. Opioids Aware is a web-based resource for patients and healthcare professionals, jointly produced by the Faculty of Pain Medicine of Royal College of Anaesthetists and Public Health England, to support prescribing of opioid medicines for pain. https://fpm.ac.uk/opioids-aware. Cannabinoids There has been increasing interest and changes in national regulations regarding the use of cannabinoids for medicinal use. Regarding pain the evidence base for the use of cannabinoids is weak [448-450] and further well conducted clinical trials are necessary. This is an area where further guidance and research is likely in the coming years. 