6.2.3. Metastatic disease (stage II C and III). 6.2.3.1. Primary chemotherapy 6.2.3.1.1. Good-prognosis risk group - seminomatous germ cell tumour For metastatic seminoma, a cisplatin-based regimen should be used. A cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy has shown superior efficacy over carboplatin-based regimens [169]. The standard regimen in good-risk seminoma is three, twenty-one days cycles of BEP (Table 6). Alternatively, EP x 4 may be considered especially when bleomycin is contraindicated [170]. This achieves similar response rates but may have a slightly higher risk of relapse. Post-chemotherapy masses should be managed as described in Section 6.5.2. 6.2.3.1.2. Intermediate-prognosis risk group - seminomatous germ cell tumour For patients with intermediate-risk seminoma, BEP x 4 is the standard regimen. In bleomycin is contraindicated the combination of etoposide, cisplatin, ifosfamide (VIP) should be given. No RCT has focused specifically on this rare group of patients (see Table 4). 6.2.3.1.3. Good-prognosis risk group - non-seminomatous germ cell tumour The standard regimen in good-risk non-seminoma is BEP x 3 (Table 6) [170]. An RCT support the equivalence of three or five-day regimes with three or four cycles of BEP for projected two-years PFS. Three-day regimes are associated with increased toxicity [171,172]. Based on these data the BEP x 3 as a five-day regimen is strongly recommended in the good-prognosis risk group. Two RCTs support the superiority of BEP x 3 over other regimes or schedule intensities [156,173]. A further RCT has suggested that when EP is used, the mortality rate is twice that of with BEP, although the difference did not reach statistical significance [156]. Patients with a clear contraindication to bleomycin may receive EP x 4 [171]. In all other cases omission of bleomycin is not recommended. For more information regarding Chemotherapy protocols, please visit the EAU guidelines website:https://uroweb.org/guidelines/testicular-cancer/publications-appendices 6.2.3.1.4. Intermediate-prognosis risk group - non-seminomatous germ cell tumour The standard regimen is BEP x 4 [174]. Four cycles of VIP has similar efficacy but is more myelotoxic [175]. Four cycles of VIP including primary G-CSF prophylaxis should be applied in patients with contraindications to bleomycin. 6.2.3.1.5. Poor-prognosis risk group - non-seminomatous germ cell tumour The standard regimen is four cycles of BEP. Four cycles of VIP have similar efficacy, but is more myelotoxic [175]. Four cycles of VIP including primary granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) prophylaxis should be applied in patients with contraindications to bleomycin [176,177]. Serum tumour marker decline is the only prospectively confirmed predictor for response to cisplatin chemotherapy in metastatic germ cell tumour patients. Patients with inadequate tumour marker decline after the first or second cycle of BEP represent a prognostically inferior subgroup [177,178]. There are several ways to calculate tumour marker decline kinetics with an example available at: https://www.gustaveroussy.fr/calculation-tumor/NSGCT.html. An RCT demonstrated improved PFS when intensifying treatment with dose-dense chemotherapy in patients with an early unfavourable tumour marker decline [179]. The trial was not powered to estimate OS differences. Based on the results from this trial, patients with an unfavourable tumour marker decline after BEP x 1 can be switched to a more intensive (dose-dense) chemotherapy regimen [179]. Additional patient groups with an unfavourable prognosis on standard treatment are primary mediastinal non-seminoma and patients with brain metastases at initial diagnosis [100,180]. These may also be candidates for upfront intensified treatment, preferably in a prospective study. In RCTs, primary high-dose chemotherapy (HDCT) with subsequent autologous stem cell transplantation has not shown an OS benefit in the overall poor-prognosis patient population in RCTs [176,177]. Selected patients, such as primary mediastinal nonseminoma, do have poor survival following standard dose chemotherapy [181]. They may derive a benefit from primary HDCT [182], preferably within a prospective protocol. Better outcomes are reported for intermediate and poor prognosis patients treated at high-volume centres [183-185]. Due to their unfavourable survival, poor-prognosis patients should be managed at centres with interdisciplinary germ cell tumour expertise and treated in ongoing prospective trials or registries, whenever possible. There are no general recommendations for treatment modifications for patients with poor performance status (Karnofsky < 50%) or extended liver infiltration (> 50%), although two small patient series indicate that an initial cycle of dose-reduced therapy may reduce acute mortality without compromising long-term outcomes. The number of subsequent cycles of full-dose therapy should, however, not be reduced after an initial low-dose induction cycle [184,186]. Patients with widespread pulmonary metastases are at risk for pulmonary haemorrhage and subsequent acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) with induction chemotherapy. To reduce this risk, primary cytoreductive induction chemotherapy with EP over two to three days should be administered, followed by the first cycle of standard chemotherapy when the risk of ARDS has passed (typically after ten days) [184]. Table 6: Level of evidence for prognostic group and treatment Prognostic group IGCCCGTreatmentLEGood (SGCT and NSGCT)BEP x 3 or EP x 41bIntermediate (SGCT and NSGCT)BEP x 4 or VIP x 41bPoor (NSGCT)BEP x 4 or VIP x 4 if favourable marker decline1bDose escalation in selected cases with inadequate serum tumour marker decline1b 6.2.3.1.6. Prevention of thromboembolism events during chemotherapy Some RCTs have assessed the risks and benefits of thromboprophylaxis in ambulatory cancer patients receiving chemotherapy and report a relative risk reduction of 30-60% in venous thromboembolic events (VTE) at the cost of a doubling in bleeding risk [187-190]. Based on these results, the most recent American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) Clinical Practice Guideline Update recommends thromboprophylaxis with apixaban, rivaroxaban, or low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) to cancer patients with a high risk of VTE and low risk of bleeding [191]. Metastatic germ cell tumour (mGCT) patients were under-represented in all trials and thus, it is not clear whether this recommendation applies to this group although retrospective data suggests a similar efficacy of VTE prophylaxis [192]. The EAU Guideline panel has discussed a recommendation regarding thromboprophylaxis. All members agreed that men with mGCTs undergoing cisplatin-based chemotherapy are at high-risk for VTE, and with the exception of those with choriocarcinoma and high volume extra-peritoneal disease, are at low risk of bleeding. Given the apparent high VTE incidence* and only non-validated VTE risk factors, the panel preferences were divided between those panel members that favoured thromboprophylaxis in all men and those panel members that restricted thromboprophylaxis to men with certain risk factors. Additionally, the majority of the panel agreed that a central venous-access device should be avoided whenever possible as this represents the only modifiable risk factor, which remained significantly associated with VTE in a multivariable risk-prediction model [193,194]. *For more information regarding the prevention of thromboembolism events during chemotherapy, please see appendix 2, available online https://uroweb.org/guidelines/testicular-cancer/publications-appendices. 6.2.3.1.7. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the prevention of thromboembolism events during chemotherapy Summary of evidenceLEThromboembolic events occur more frequently in male patients with GCTs receiving chemotherapy than in young males under chemotherapy for other cancers.2bRetrospective studies have identified multiple risk factors for the development of thromboembolic events including increasing stage, size of retroperitoneal lymph nodes at different cut-offs, Khorana score > 3 and indwelling vascular access device (only modifiable risk factor).2b RecommendationsStrength ratingBalance the individual patients’ potential benefits and risks of thromboprophylaxis during first-line chemotherapy in men with metastatic germ cell tumours.WeakAvoid use of central venous-access devices during first-line chemotherapy whenever possible.Weak 