5.1. Symptoms. Many renal masses remain asymptomatic until the late disease stages. The majority of RCCs are detected incidentally by non-invasive imaging investigating various non-specific symptoms and other abdominal diseases [98] (LE: 3). In a prospective observational cohort study, 60% of patients overall, 87% of patients with stage 1a renal tumours and 36% of patients with stage III or IV disease presented incidentally [99]. The classic triad of flank pain, visible haematuria, and palpable abdominal mass is rare (6-10%) and correlates with aggressive histology, advanced disease, and poorer outcomes [99-101] (LE: 3). Paraneoplastic syndromes are found in approximately 30% of patients with symptomatic RCCs [102] (LE: 4). Some symptomatic patients present with symptoms caused by metastatic disease, such as bone pain or persistent cough [103] (LE: 3). 5.1.1. Physical examination Physical examination has a limited role in RCC diagnosis. However, the following findings should prompt radiological examinations: palpable abdominal mass;palpable cervical lymphadenopathy;non-reducing varicocele and bilateral lower extremity oedema, which suggests venous involvement. 5.1.2. Laboratory findings Commonly assessed laboratory parameters are serum creatinine, glomerular filtration rate (GFR), complete cell blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, liver function study, alkaline phosphatase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), serum corrected calcium [104], coagulation study, and urinalysis (LE: 4). For central renal masses abutting or invading the collecting system, urinary cytology and possibly endoscopic assessment should be considered in order to exclude urothelial cancer (LE: 4). Split renal function should be estimated using renal scintigraphy in the following situations [105,106] (LE: 2b): when renal function is compromised, as indicated by increased serum creatinine or significantly decreased GFR;when renal function is clinically important; e.g., in patients with a solitary kidney or multiple- or bilateral tumours. Renal scintigraphy is an additional diagnostic option in patients at risk of future renal impairment due to comorbid disorders. 