5.3. Renal tumour biopsy. 5.3.1. Indications and rationale Percutaneous renal tumour biopsy can reveal histology of radiologically indeterminate renal masses and can be considered in patients who are candidates for AS of small masses, to obtain histology before ablative treatments, and to select the most suitable medical and surgical treatment strategy in the setting of metastatic disease [148-153] (LE: 3). A multicentre study assessing 542 surgically removed SRMs showed that the likelihood of benign findings at pathology is significantly lower in centres where biopsies are performed (5% vs. 16%), suggesting that biopsies can reduce surgery for benign tumours and the potential for short-term and long-term morbidity associated with these procedures [154]. In a recent series of patients who underwent a percutaneous biopsy for a SRM, active treatment (surgery or cryotherapy) was avoided in 50/182 patients (27.5%) because of a benign diagnosis at biopsy [155]. Renal biopsy is not indicated in comorbid and frail patients who can be considered only for conservative management (watchful waiting) regardless of biopsy results. Due to the high diagnostic accuracy of abdominal imaging, renal tumour biopsy is not necessary in patients with a contrast-enhancing renal mass for whom surgery is planned (LE: 4). Core biopsies of cystic renal masses have a lower diagnostic yield and accuracy and are not recommended, unless areas with a solid pattern are present (Bosniak IV cysts) [148,151,156] (LE: 2b/3). Histological characterisation by percutaneous biopsy of undefined retroperitoneal masses at imaging may be useful for decision making, especially in the younger patient population. 5.3.2. Technique Percutaneous sampling can be performed under local anaesthesia with needle core biopsy and/or fine needle aspiration (FNA). Biopsies can be performed under US or CT guidance, with a similar diagnostic yield [151,157] (LE: 2b). Eighteen-gauge needles are ideal for core biopsies, as they result in low morbidity and provide sufficient tissue for diagnosis [148,152,158] (LE: 2b). A coaxial technique allowing multiple biopsies through a coaxial cannula should always be used to avoid potential tumour seeding [148,152] (LE: 3). Core biopsies are preferred for the characterisation of solid renal masses while a combination with FNA can provide complimentary results and improve accuracy for complex cystic lesions [156,159,160] (LE: 2a). A SR and meta-analysis of the diagnostic performance and complications of renal tumour biopsy was performed by the Panel, including 57 publications and a total of 5,228 patients. Needle core biopsies were found to have better accuracy for the diagnosis of malignancy compared with FNA [156]. Other studies showed that solid pattern, larger tumour size and exophytic location are predictors of a diagnostic core biopsy [148,151,157] (LE: 2b). 5.3.3. Diagnostic yield and accuracy In experienced centres, core biopsies have a high diagnostic yield, specificity, and sensitivity for the diagnosis of malignancy. The above-mentioned meta-analysis showed that sensitivity and specificity of diagnostic core biopsies for the diagnosis of malignancy are 99.1% and 99.7%, respectively [156] (LE: 2b). However, 0–22.6% of core biopsies are non-diagnostic (8% in the meta-analysis) [149-153,157,158,161] (LE: 2a). If a biopsy is non-diagnostic, and radiologic findings are suspicious for malignancy, a further biopsy or surgical exploration should be considered (LE: 4). Repeat biopsies have been reported to be diagnostic in a high proportion of cases (83–100%) [148,162-164]. Accuracy of renal tumour biopsies for the diagnosis of tumour histotype is good. The median concordance rate between tumour histotype on renal tumour biopsy and on the surgical specimen of the following PN or RN was 90.3% in the pooled analysis [156]. Assessment of tumour grade on core biopsies is challenging. In the pooled analysis the overall accuracy for nuclear grading was poor (62.5%), but significantly improved (87%) using a simplified two-tier system (high vs. low grade) [156] (LE: 2a). The ideal number and location of core biopsies are not defined. However, at least two good quality cores should be obtained and necrotic areas should be avoided to maximise diagnostic yield [148,151,165,166] (LE: 2b). Peripheral biopsies are preferable for larger tumours, to avoid areas of central necrosis [167] (LE: 2b). In cT2 or greater renal masses, multiple core biopsies taken from at least four separate solid enhancing areas in the tumour were shown to achieve a higher diagnostic yield and a higher accuracy to identify sarcomatoid features, without increasing the complication rate [168]. 5.3.4. Morbidity Overall, percutaneous biopsies have a low morbidity [156]. Tumour seeding along the needle tract has been regarded as anecdotal in large series and pooled analyses on renal tumour biopsies. Especially the coaxial technique has been regarded as a safe method to avoid any seeding of tumour cells. However, authors recently reported on seven patients in whom tumour seeding was identified on histological examination of the resection specimen after surgical resection of RCC following diagnostic percutaneous biopsy [169]. Six of the seven cases were of the pRCC type. The clinical significance of these findings is still uncertain but only one of these patients developed local tumour recurrence at the site of the previous biopsy [169]. Spontaneously resolving subcapsular/perinephric haematomas are reported in 4.3% of cases in a pooled analysis, but clinically significant bleeding is unusual (0-1.4%; 0.7% in the pooled analysis) and generally self-limiting [156]. Percutaneous biopsy of renal hilar masses is technically feasible with a diagnostic yield similar to that of cortical masses, but with significantly higher post-procedural bleeding compared with cortical masses [170]. 5.3.5. Genetic assessment Renal cancer can be related to an inherited or de novo monogenic germline alteration and this recognition has significant implications [171]. Hereditary kidney cancer is thought to account for 5-8% of all kidney cancer cases, although this number is likely an underestimation since a more recent study found germline mutations in up to 38% of all metastatic kidney cancer patients [172] (see Section 3.4.4. - Hereditary kidney tumours). Patients with a germline predisposition to kidney cancer often require multidisciplinary approaches, it is critical for clinicians to be familiar with how and when referral for counselling is warranted, methods of genetic testing, implications of the findings, screening of at-risk (non-renal) organs, and the screening protocol for family members. Well-defined renal cancer management strategies exist, and specific therapeutic strategies are available or in development (see Section 3.4.4). Lack of a syndromic manifestation does not exclude a genetic contribution to cancer development. Moreover, other genetic components or polymorphisms are heritable and may confer a mildly increased risk. When several risk alleles are present, they can significantly increase cancer risk. Many factors are associated with an increased risk of hereditary renal cancer syndromes. For instance, even in the absence of clinical manifestations and personal/family history, an age of onset of 46 years or younger should trigger consideration for genetic counselling/germline mutation testing [46]. Moreover, presence of bilateral or multifocal tumours/cysts and/or a first- or second-degree relative with RCC and/or a close blood relative with a known pathogenic variant significantly increases the risk to detect hereditary cancer. The presence of renal cysts can be associated with BHD and VHL, and form part of the clinical diagnostic spectrum. Moreover, specific histologic characteristics can support differential diagnosis of a particular RCC syndrome (e.g., multifocal papillary histology, hereditary fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC, RCC with fumarate hydratase deficiency, multiple chromophobe, oncocytoma or oncocytic hybrid, succinate dehydrogenase-deficient RCC histology). Finally, additional tuberous sclerosis complex criteria should be assessed in individuals with AML [46,173-181]. If additional risk factors are established in a patient, referral to a comprehensive clinical care centre, or a hospital with demonstrated expertise in managing hereditary cancer syndromes, will provide a dedicated working team, tailored clinical decisions, research translational programme, appropriate patient psychosocial support, and prospective collection of clinical data and biological samples. This can contribute to a better patient’s care and further improvements in cancer care. 