5.2.7.3.α1-blockers + Beta-3 agonist. Mechanism of action: Combination therapy consists of an α1-blocker (Section 5.2.1) together with a beta-3-agonist (Section 5.2.4) as an add-on therapy in males receiving α1-blockers with persisting OAB symptoms. Efficacy: The MATCH study explored the effect of the addition of mirabegron 50 mg to tamsulosin 0.2 mg compared to tamsulosin plus placebo in 544 patients [308]. A statistically significant difference of 0.52 voids per day was seen in favour of mirabegron. Total IPSS score also improved but was not significant between the groups. Another RCT evaluated add-on therapy with mirabegron for OAB symptoms persisting after treatment with tamsulosin 0.2 mg daily in men with BPO [309]. Combination therapy was associated with greater improvements in OAB symptom score, in urinary urgency and daytime frequency as well as the storage sub-score of IPSS and QoL index compared to monotherapy with tamsulosin [310]. The PLUS phase IV trial [309] compared mirabegron and placebo in a population of males treated with a standard dose of tamsulosin 0.4 mg. After a four-week run-in period of treatment with tamsulosin 0.4 mg alone, 715 patients were randomised between placebo and mirabegron 25 mg, upgraded to 50 mg after one month. While mean number of micturition’s were significantly reduced in the experimental arm, the effect size was deemed as low (mean adjusted difference of 0.39 voids per day). Similar results were seen for mean voided volume and urgency episodes, but total IPSS, IPSS sub-scores and OAB-q symptom score were not significantly different between the groups. An RCT comparing the efficacy of mirabegron 50 mg or fesoterodine 4 mg add-on therapy to silodosin in LUTS patients with persisting OAB symptoms reported that at three months, fesoterodine add-on therapy showed a significantly greater improvement than mirabegron add-on therapy in OAB symptom score and urgency score and IPSS-QoL score [237]. Fesoterodine was also superior in alleviating DO. Tolerability and safety: In the MATCH study main adverse events were in line with previous trials, and cardiovascular events were uncommon in the studied populations [308]. The PLUS phase IV trial also reported adverse events similar to those seen in previous trials (hypertension, headache and nasopharyngitis being the most frequent) [309]. There were six episodes of retention recorded (1.7%) and overall, no clinically significant specific change was seen in Qmax and PVR. An open-label, randomised, 2-arm, 2-sequence study reported that the addition of mirabegron or tamsulosin to patients under tamsulosin or mirabegron mono therapy did not cause clinically relevant changes in cardiovascular safety or safety profiles [311]. Solifenacin and mirabegron were also compared in another RCT that has shown comparable efficacy but a better safety profile for mirabegron [312]. Practical consideration: Add-on therapy with mirabegron in patients with remaining symptoms under α1-blocker therapy has been evaluated only in short-term clinical trials. The short-term benefit remains uncertain with a low effect size in urinary frequency compared to placebo, and more studies with longer follow-up are required Summary of evidenceLECombination treatment with α1-blockers and mirabegron results in a slight decrease of number of voids and urgency episodes per day compared with α1-blockers alone.1bAdverse events of both drug classes are seen with combined treatment using α1-blockers and mirabegron.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingUse combination treatment of a α1-blocker with mirabegron in patients with persistent storage LUTS after treatment with α1-blocker monotherapy.Weak 