5.2.7.1. α1-blockers + 5α-reductase inhibitors. Mechanism of action: Combination therapy consists of an α1-blocker (Section 5.2.1) together with a 5-ARI (Section 5.2.2). The α1-blocker exhibits clinical effects within hours or days, whereas the 5-ARI needs several months to develop full clinical efficacy. Finasteride has been tested in clinical trials with alfuzosin, terazosin, doxazosin or terazosin, and dutasteride with tamsulosin. Efficacy: Several studies have investigated the efficacy of combination therapy against an α1-blocker, 5-ARI, or placebo alone. Initial studies with follow-up periods of six to twelve months demonstrated that the α1-blocker was superior to finasteride in symptom reduction, whereas combination therapy of both agents was not superior to α1-blocker monotherapy [182,183,284]. In studies with a placebo arm, the α1-blocker was consistently more effective than placebo, but finasteride was not. Data at one year in the MTOPS study showed similar results [65]. Long-term data (four years) from the MTOPS and CombAT studies showed that combination treatment is superior to monotherapy for symptoms and Qmax, and superior to α1-blocker alone in reducing the risk of AUR or need for surgery [65,163,164]. The CombAT study demonstrated that combination treatment is superior to either monotherapy regarding symptoms and flow rate starting from month nine, and superior to α1-blocker for AUR and the need for surgery after eight months [164]. Thus, the differences in MTOPS may reflect different inclusion and exclusion criteria and baseline patient characteristics. Discontinuation of the α1-blocker after six to nine months of combination therapy was investigated in an RCT and an open-label multicentre trial [285,286]. The first trial evaluated the combination of tamsulosin with dutasteride and the impact of tamsulosin discontinuation after six months [285], with almost three quarters of patients reporting no worsening of symptoms. However, patients with severe symptoms (IPSS > 20) at baseline may benefit from longer combination therapy. A more recent trial evaluated the symptomatic outcome of finasteride monotherapy at three and nine months after discontinuation of nine-month combination therapy [286]. Lower urinary tract symptom improvement after combination therapy was sustained at three months (IPSS difference 1.24) and nine months (IPSS difference 0.4). The limitations of the studies include short duration and short follow-up period after discontinuation. In both the MTOPS and CombAT studies, combination therapy was superior to monotherapy in preventing clinical progression as defined by an IPSS increase of at least four points, AUR, UTI, incontinence, or an increase in creatinine > 50%. The MTOPS study found that the risk of long-term clinical progression (primarily due to increasing IPSS) was reduced by 66% with combined therapy vs. placebo and to a greater extent than with either finasteride or doxazosin monotherapy (34% and 39%, respectively) [65]. In addition, finasteride (alone or in combination), but not doxazosin alone, significantly reduced both the risks of AUR and the need for BPO-related surgery over the four-year study. In the CombAT study, combination therapy reduced the relative risks of AUR by 68%, BPO-related surgery by 71%, and symptom deterioration by 41% compared with tamsulosin, after four years [287]. To prevent one case of urinary retention and/or surgical treatment, thirteen patients need to be treated for four years with dutasteride and tamsulosin combination therapy compared to tamsulosin monotherapy while the absolute risk reduction (risk difference) was 7.7%. The CONDUCT study compared efficacy and safety of a fixed-dose combination of dutasteride and tamsulosin to a WW approach with the potential initiation of tamsulosin (step-up approach) in a two-year RCT with a total of 742 patients. In both arms detailed lifestyle advice was given. This fixed-dose combination resulted in a rapid and sustained improvement in men with moderate LUTS at risk of disease progression, the difference in IPSS at 24 months was 5.4 in the active arm and 3.6 in the placebo arm [288]. Furthermore, tamsulosin plus dutasteride significantly reduced the relative risk of clinical progression (mainly characterised as a worsening in symptoms) by 43.1% when compared with WW, with an absolute risk reduction of 11.3% (number needed to treat [NNT] = 9). The influence of baseline variables on changes in IPSS after combination therapy with dutasteride plus tamsulosin or either monotherapy was tested based on the four-year results of the CombAT study. Combination therapy provided consistent improvement of LUTS over tamsulosin across all analysed baseline variables at 48 months [289]. A combination of the 5-ARI finasteride and tadalafil 5 mg was tested in a large scale RCT against finasteride monotherapy. This study supports the concept of this novel combination therapy and is described in more detail in section 5.2.5 [290]. Tolerability and safety: Adverse events for both drug classes have been reported with combination treatment [65,163,164]. The adverse events observed during combination treatment were typical of α1-blockers and 5-ARIs. The frequency of adverse events was significantly higher for combination therapy. The MTOPS study demonstrated that the incidence of treatment related adverse events is higher during the first year of combined treatment between doxazosin and finasteride [291]. A meta-analysis measuring the impact of medical treatments for LUTS/BPH on ejaculatory function, reported that combination therapy with α1-blockers and 5-ARIs resulted in a three-fold increased risk of EjD compared with each monotherapy [177]. Practical considerations: Compared with α1-blockers or 5-ARI monotherapy, combination therapy results in a greater improvement in LUTS and increase in Qmax and is superior in prevention of disease progression. However, combination therapy is also associated with a higher rate of adverse events. Combination therapy should therefore be prescribed primarily in men who have moderate-to-severe LUTS who are at risk of disease progression (higher prostate volume, higher PSA concentration, advanced age, higher PVR, lower Qmax, etc.). Combination therapy should only be used when long-term treatment (more than twelve months) is intended, and patients should be informed of this. Discontinuation of the α1-blocker after six months might be considered in men with moderate LUTS. Summary of evidenceLELong-term data (four years) from the MTOPS and CombAT studies showed that combination treatment is superior to monotherapy for symptoms and Qmax, and superior to α1-blocker alone in reducing the risk of AUR or need for surgery.1bThe MTOPS study found that the risk of long-term clinical progression (primarily due to increasing IPSS) was reduced by 66% with combined therapy vs. placebo and to a greater extent than with either finasteride or doxazosin monotherapy.1bThe CombAT study found that combination therapy reduced the relative risks of AUR by 68%, BPH-related surgery by 71%, and symptom deterioration by 41% compared with tamsulosin, after four years.1bAdverse events of both drug classes are seen with combined treatment using α1-blockers and 5-ARIs.1b RecommendationStrength ratingOffer combination treatment with an α1-blocker and a 5α-reductase inhibitor to men with moderate-to-severe LUTS and an increased risk of disease progression (e.g. prostate volume > 40 mL).Strong 