5.2.7.2. α1-blockers + muscarinic receptor antagonists. Mechanism of action: Combination treatment consists of an α1-blocker together with an antimuscarinic aiming to antagonise both α1-adrenoceptors and muscarinic receptors. The possible combinations have not all been tested in clinical trials to date. Efficacy: Several RCTs and prospective studies investigated combination therapy, lasting four to twelve weeks, either as an initial treatment in men with OAB and presumed BPO or as a sequential treatment for storage symptoms persisting while on an α1-blocker [212,223,287,292-296]. Combination treatment has marginal efficacy in reducing urgency, UUI, voiding frequency, nocturia, or IPSS compared with α1-blockers or placebo alone, and improves QoL [223,296]. A SR and meta-analysis of RCTs (six studies of treatment-naïve patients, and five studies of men with persistent storage LUTS despite prior treatment with α-blockers) concluded that the addition of antimuscarinics to α-blockers marginally reduced number of micturition episodes per day (standard mean difference -0.19) but did not have a significant impact on number of urgency episodes, and had a higher side effect profile [297]. Similar findings were also reported in a Cochrane review of RCTs of men with LUTS secondary to BPO, with a small improvement in IPSS (mean difference 2.04) and QoL (mean difference 0.71) with combination therapy compared to α-blocker monotherapy, although overall certainty of evidence was deemed moderate to very low [298]. Symptom improvement is higher regardless of PSA concentration with combination therapy, whereas tolterodine alone improved symptoms mainly in men with a serum PSA of < 1.3 ng/mL [224]. In a meta-analysis of sixteen studies with 3,548 patients with BPH/OAB, initial combination treatment of an α1-blocker with anticholinergic medication showed no difference in total IPSS and Qmax between the two groups [299]. Effectiveness of therapy is evident primarily in those men with moderate-to-severe storage LUTS [300]. Long term use of combination therapy has been reported in patients receiving treatment for up to one year, showing symptomatic response is maintained, with a low incidence of AUR [301]. In men with moderate-to-severe storage symptoms, voiding symptoms and PVR < 150 mL, the reduction in symptoms using combination therapy is associated with patient-relevant improvements in health related QoL compared with placebo and α1-blocker monotherapy [302]. Combined behavioural and drug therapy yielded greater improvements in OAB symptoms than drug therapy alone, but not behavioural therapy alone in a RCT evaluating the effectiveness of combined behavioural strategies and drug therapy for OAB symptoms in men [303]. Tolerability and safety: Adverse events of both drug classes are seen with combined treatment using α1-blockers and antimuscarinics. The most common side-effect is dry mouth. Some side-effects (e.g. dry mouth or ejaculation failure) may show increased incidence which cannot simply be explained by summing the incidence with the drugs used separately. Increased PVR may be seen, but is usually not clinically significant, and risk of AUR is low up to one year of treatment [220,304,305]. Antimuscarinics do not cause evident deterioration in Qmax used in conjunction with an α1-blocker in men with OAB symptoms [296,306]. An RCT investigated safety in terms of maximum detrusor pressure and Qmax for solifenacin (6 mg or 9 mg) with tamsulosin in men with LUTS and BOO compared with placebo [307]. The combination therapy was non-inferior to placebo for the primary urodynamic variables; Qmax was increased vs. placebo [307]. Practical considerations: Class effects are likely to underlie efficacy and QoL using an α1-blocker and antimuscarinic. Trials used mainly storage symptom endpoints, were of short duration, and included only men with low PVR volumes at baseline. Therefore, measuring PVR is recommended during combination treatment. Summary of evidenceLECombination treatment with α1-blockers and antimuscarinics is effective for improving LUTS-related QoL impairment.2Combination treatment with α1-blockers and antimuscarinics is more effective for reducing urgency, UUI, voiding frequency, nocturia, or IPSS compared with α1-blockers or placebo alone.2Adverse events of both drug classes are seen with combined treatment using α1-blockers and antimuscarinics.1There is a low risk of AUR using α1-blockers and antimuscarinics in men known to have a PVR volume of < 150 mL.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingUse combination treatment of a α1-blocker with a muscarinic receptor antagonist in patients with moderate-to-severe LUTS if relief of storage symptoms has been insufficient with monotherapy with either drug.WeakDo not prescribe combination treatment in men with a post-void residual volume > 150 mL.Weak 