5.2.7.4.α1-blockers + Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors. Mechanism of action: Combination treatment consists of an α1-blocker together with a phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitor (Section 5.2.5) with the intent to achieve better improvements in LUTS. Efficacy: A meta-analysis of five RCTs (two studies with tadalafil 20 mg daily, two with sildenafil 25 mg, and one with vardenafil 20 mg), showed that combination therapy significantly improved IPSS score (-1.8), IIEF score (+3.6) and Qmax (+1.5 mL/s) compared with α-blockers alone [255]. Both a SR and Cochrane review found similar findings, and a network meta-analysis of 55 RCTs (excluding 5-ARIs) found that the combination of PDE5Is and α-blockers had greater IPSS improvement than monotherapy and any other combination therapy [253,313,314]. These results have been confirmed by prospective studies which have shown an improvement in the IPSS QoL, IIEF-5 score and Qmax in patients taking PDE5Is and α-blockers [252,315]. Tolerability and safety: No serious AEs have been reported in the association of PDE5-Is and α-blockers. In RCT comparing α-blockers alone with combined therapy, AEs occur with similar incidence across the two treatments arms suggesting that the addition of PDE5Is to α-blockers is well tolerated [316]. Practical consideration: The combination of α-blockers and PDE5Is versus α-blockers monotherapy leads to greater improvements in LUTS, QoL, erectile function and Qmax without increase in AEs. Data from meta-analyses suggest how younger men with low body mass index and more severe LUTS may be the population that benefits most from this association [255]. However, further studies with large populations and longer follow-up are needed to confirm these findings. Summary of evidenceLECombination of PDE5Is and alpha blockers improves IPSS, but magnitude of effect of clinical significance is low.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingUse combination treatment of a α1-blockers + Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors in patients with bothersome LUTS, particularly in patients willing to improve their erectile function.WeakInform the patients that the magnitude of the effect is modest.Weak Note: All patients should be counselled about pharmacological treatment related adverse events in order to select the most appropriate treatment for each individual patient 