4.10. Imaging. 4.10.1. Upper urinary tract Men with LUTS are not at increased risk for upper tract malignancy or other abnormalities when compared to the overall population [73,94-96]. Several arguments support the use of renal US in preference to urological computed tomography (UROCT). Ultrasound allows for better characterisation of renal masses, the possibility of investigating the liver and retroperitoneum, and simultaneous evaluation of the bladder, PVR and prostate, together with a lower cost, no radiation dose and less side effects [94]. Ultrasound can be used for the evaluation of men with large PVR, haematuria, or a history of urolithiasis. Summary of evidenceLEMen with LUTS are not at increased risk for upper tract malignancy or other abnormalities when compared to the overall population.3Ultrasound can be used for the evaluation of men with large PVR, haematuria, or a history of urolithiasis.4 RecommendationStrength ratingPerform ultrasound of the upper urinary tract in men with LUTS.Weak 4.10.2. Prostate Imaging of the prostate can be performed by transabdominal US, TRUS, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, in daily practice, prostate imaging is performed by transabdominal (suprapubic) US or TRUS [94]. 4.10.2.1. Prostate size and shape Assessment of prostate size is important for the selection of interventional treatment, i.e., open prostatectomy (OP), enucleation techniques, transurethral resection, transurethral incision of the prostate (TUIP), or minimally invasive therapies. It is also important prior to treatment with 5α-reductase inhibitors (5-ARIs). Prostate volume predicts symptom progression and the risk of complications [96]. Transrectal US is superior to transabdominal volume measurement [97,98]. The presence of a median lobe may guide treatment choice in patients scheduled for a minimally invasive approach since medial lobe presence can be a contraindication for some minimally invasive treatments (see section 5.3). Summary of evidenceLEAssessment of prostate size by TRUS or transabdominal US is important for the selection of interventional treatment and prior to treatment with 5-ARIs3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform imaging of the prostate when considering medical treatment for male LUTS, if it assists in the choice of the appropriate drug.WeakPerform imaging of the prostate when considering surgical treatment.Strong 4.10.3. Voiding cysto-urethrogram Voiding cysto-urethrogram (VCUG), on its own, is not recommended in the routine diagnostic work-up of men with LUTS, but it may be useful for the detection of vesico-ureteral reflux, bladder diverticula, or urethral diseases and can be combined with urodynamics in the form of video-urodynamics. Retrograde urethrography may additionally be useful for the evaluation of suspected urethral strictures. 