4.2. Symptom score questionnaires. All published guidelines for male LUTS recommend using validated symptom score questionnaires [18,20]. Several questionnaires have been developed which are sensitive to symptom changes and can be used to monitor treatment [25-31]. Symptom scores are helpful in quantifying LUTS and in identifying which type of symptoms are predominant; however, they are not disease-, gender-, or age-specific. A SR evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of individual symptoms and questionnaires, compared with urodynamic studies (the reference standard), for the diagnosis of BOO in males with LUTS found that individual symptoms and questionnaires for diagnosing BOO were not significantly associated with one another [32]. 4.2.1. The International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) The IPSS is an eight-item questionnaire, consisting of seven symptom questions and one QoL question [26]. The IPSS score is categorised as ‘asymptomatic’ (0 points), ‘mildly symptomatic’ (1-7 points), ‘moderately symptomatic’ (8-19 points), and ‘severely symptomatic’ (20-35 points). Limitations include lack of assessment of incontinence, post-micturition symptoms, and bother caused by each separate symptom. 4.2.2. The International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire for Male LUTS (ICIQ-MLUTS) The ICIQ-MLUTS was created from the International Continence Society (ICS) Male questionnaire. It is a widely used and validated patient completed questionnaire including incontinence questions and bother for each symptom [27]. It contains thirteen items, with subscales for nocturia and OAB, and is available in 24 languages. [33]. The ICIQ-MLUTS explore more deeply the subtypes of males LUTS [34]. 4.2.3. Danish Prostate Symptom Score (DAN-PSS) The DAN-PSS [30] is a symptom score used mainly in Denmark and Finland. The DAN-PSS has twelve questions divided into parts A and B with questions on incontinence and measures the bother of each individual LUTS. 4.2.4. The Symptoms of Lower Urinary Tract Dysfunction Research Network (LURN-SI-10) The LURN-SI-10 correlates strongly with the IPSS but identifies additional important symptomatology including incontinence and bladder pain in men with LUTS [35]. Summary of evidenceLESymptom questionnaires are sensitive to symptom changes.3Symptom scores can quantify LUTS and identify which types of symptoms are predominant; however, they are not disease-, or age-specific.3 RecommendationStrength ratingUse a validated symptom score questionnaire including bother and quality of life assessment during the initial assessment of male LUTS and for re-evaluation during and/or after treatment.Strong 