4.3. Frequency volume charts and/or bladder diaries. The recording of the volume and time of each void by the patient is referred to as an FVC. Inclusion of additional information such as fluid intake, use of pads, activities during recording, or which grades symptom severity and bladder sensation is termed a bladder diary [3]. Parameters that can be derived from the FVC and bladder diary include day-time and night-time voiding frequency, total voided volume, the fraction of urine production during the night (nocturnal polyuria index), and volume of individual voids. The mean 24-hour urine production is subject to considerable variation. Likewise, circumstantial influence and intra-individual variation cause FVC parameters to fluctuate, though there is comparatively little data [36,37]. The FVC/bladder diary is particularly relevant in nocturia, where it underpins the categorisation of underlying mechanism(s) [38-40]. The use of FVCs may cause a ‘bladder training (BT) effect’ and influence the frequency of nocturnal voids [41]. The duration of the FVC/bladder diary needs to be long enough to avoid sampling errors, but short enough to avoid non-compliance [23]. A SR of the available literature recommended FVCs should continue for at least three days [42]. There is no data as to whether the three days should be consecutive or scattered or whether it has to be on weekdays or weekends, as long as it is representative. The ICIQ-Bladder diary (ICIQ-BD) is the only diary that has undergone full validation [43]. Summary of evidenceLEFrequency volume charts (FVC) and/or bladder diaries provide real-time documentation of urinary function and reduce recall bias.3Three- day FVCs provide reliable measurement of urinary symptoms in patients with LUTS similar to seven days and without losing the diagnostic accuracy.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingUse a bladder diary to assess male LUTS with a storage component, especially nocturia.StrongTell the patient to complete a bladder diary for at least three days.Strong 