3.3. Late-onset hypogonadism. Testosterone production declines with ageing. The European Male Aging Study (EMAS) reported a 0.4% per annum (log hormone-age) decrease in total testosterone and a 1.3% per annum decline in free testosterone (fT) [5]. Late onset hypogonadism is the term frequently used to describe this phenomenon and the detection of hypogonadism in adulthood. Evidence indicates that several associated diseases and chronic comorbidities can interfere with the HPG axis leading to the development of primary hypogonadism or, more frequently, secondary hypogonadism in adulthood, thus significantly influencing the physiological age-dependent decline of testosterone. Combining the data from three different waves of the Massachusetts Male Aging Study (MMAS), demonstrated that associated comorbidity and obesity significantly decreased, whereas smoking tended to increase total, free and bio-available testosterone concentrations [57]. Data derived from the EMAS confirmed these findings [5,19]. Based upon these data and other evidence, as previously reported the concept of functional and organic hypogonadism has been more recently introduced (see above) [58]. Considering that suppression of HPG axis activity is functional, and potentially reversible by empiric measures, such as weight loss, the need for testosterone therapy has been questioned [58]. 3.3.1. Clinical Diagnosis and Evaluation The mainstay of LOH diagnosis includes signs and symptoms consistent with hypogonadism, coupled with biochemical evidence of low morning serum total testosterone levels on two or more occasions, measured with a reliable assay and in fasting conditions. 3.3.2. History taking Specific symptoms associated with hypogonadism, including LOH, are shown in Table 3. These symptoms are non-specific and need to be recorded and taken in context with the clinical and biochemical state. Several self-reported questionnaires or structural interviews have been developed for screening of hypogonadism. Although these case-history tools have demonstrated clinical utility in supporting the biochemical diagnosis of hypogonadism, or in the assessment of testosterone therapy outcomes, their specificity remains poor and they should not be used for a systematic screening of hypogonadal men [59]. Headache and/or visual disturbance may indicate a pituitary-related disorder. History of surgical intervention for cryptorchidism or hypospadias must be taken into account as possible signs of congenital defects. Chronic and systemic comorbidities must be comprehensively investigated in every patient. Use of drugs that potentially interfere with the HPG axis should be excluded (Table 1). Acute diseases are associated with development of functional hypogonadism and determination of serum total testosterone levels should be avoided in these conditions; however, the role of testosterone in the case of acute illness remains to be clarified [42,46,51,60]. Fertility issues should be always discussed. Table 3: Specific symptoms associated with LOH Sexual symptomsPhysical symptomsPsychological symptomsMore specificReduced libidoErectile dysfunctionDecreased spontaneous/morning erectionsDecreased vigorous activityDifficulty walking > 1 kmDecreased bendingLow mood/mood deflectionDecreased motivationFatigueLess specificReduced frequency of sexual intercourseReduced frequency of masturbationDelayed ejaculationHot flushesDecreased energyDecreased physical strength/function/ activityConcentration difficultiesSleep disturbances 3.3.3. Physical examination Since obesity is frequently associated with hypogonadism (mostly functional), the determination of body mass index (BMI) and the measurement of waist circumference are strongly recommended in all individuals. Testicular and penile size, as well as the presence of sexual secondary characteristics can provide useful information regarding overall androgen status. In addition, upper segment/lower segment ratio (n.v. > 0.92) and arm-span to height ratio (n.v. < 1.0) can be useful to identify a eunuchoid body shape, especially in subjects with pre-pubertal hypogonadism or delayed puberty. Finally, digital rectal examination (DRE) should be performed in all subjects to exclude prostate abnormalities before testosterone therapy (any type) or to support suspicion of hypogonadism (in case of reduced volume) [61]. 3.3.4. Laboratory Diagnostics Testosterone levels are produced in a circadian variation, which may persist in ageing men [62,63]. Testosterone levels are also potentially influenced by food intake [64]; therefore, serum total testosterone should be measured in fasting conditions in the morning (between 07.00 and 11.00 hours). A confirmatory measurement should always be undertaken in the case of a primary pathological value, and before starting any testosterone therapy. Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) represents the most accurate method for sex steroid evaluation; however, standardised automated platform immuno-assays for total testosterone assessment demonstrate a good correlation with LC-MS/MS [65]. Available immuno-assays are not able to provide an accurate estimation of fT; therefore, direct fT evaluation with these methods is not recommended and should be avoided [66]. Equilibrium dialysis is the most accurate method for total testosterone measurement and FT calculation [67]. Alternatively, fT can be derived from specific mathematical calculations using total testosterone as derived by common immunoassays and taking into account serum sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin levels [68] (http://www.issam.ch/freetesto.htm). Data from meta-analyses have shown that testosterone therapy is ineffective when baseline levels are > 12 nmol/L (3.5 ng/mL). Positive outcomes are documented when testosterone levels are < 12 nmol/L, being higher in symptomatic patients with more severe forms of hypogonadism (< 8 nmol/L). Hence, 12 nmol/L should be considered as a possible threshold for starting testosterone therapy in the presence of hypogonadal symptoms [40,69]. In clinical conditions that may interfere with SHBG levels, evaluation of fT should be considered to better estimate actual androgen levels (Figure 1). Unfortunately, despite its potential clinical value [70], no validated thresholds for fT are available from clinical studies and this represents an area of uncertainty; however, data from the EMAS indicated that fT levels < 220 pmol/L (6.4 ng/dL) increased the likelihood to correct identify hypogonadism as compared with total testosterone level alone, particularly when total testosterone levels are between 8.0 and 11 nmol per litre [8,71,72]. The determination of LH must be performed along with prolactin (PRL) when pathological total testosterone levels are detected, in order to correctly define the underlying conditions and exclude possible organic causes (Figure 1). Follicle-stimulating hormone determination can further support the diagnosis of primary or secondary hypogonadism [21,73]. Due to its negative influence on libido, PRL can also be considered as first-line screening in patients with reduced sexual desire. In addition, contrast-enhanced pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning, as well as other pituitary hormone evaluations, is required in the presence of specific symptoms such as visual disturbances, headache and when hyperprolactinemia is confirmed [74,75]. Limited evidence suggests also performing pituitary MRI in the case of severe hypogonadism (< 6 nmol/L, 1.75 ng/mL) with inadequate gonadotropin levels (Figure 1) [74-76]. 3.3.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the diagnostic evaluation and screening of LOH Summary of evidenceLESexual symptoms are the most specific symptoms associated with late-onset hypogonadism (LOH).1aDiagnosis of LOH should be based on specific signs and symptoms of androgen deficiency, together with consistently low serum testosterone levels.1aTotal testosterone 12 nmol/L (3.5 ng/mL) represents a reliable threshold to diagnose LOH.1aFunctional hypogonadism is a consequence of comorbidity/concomitant drugs, which can impair testosterone production in adulthood. The diagnosis of functional hypogonadism is a diagnosis of exclusion, after ruling out organic causes of hypogonadism.4Calculated free-testosterone of < 220 pmol/L has been suggested as a possible cut-off to diagnose LOH.3Self-reported questionnaires and structural interviews have been developed for screening of hypogonadism but their specificity remains poor.2a RecommendationsStrength ratingDiagnostic evaluationCheck for concomitant diseases, drugs and substances that can interfere with testosterone production/action.StrongMeasure total testosterone in the morning (between 07.00 and 11.00 hours) and in the fasting state, with a reliable laboratory assay.StrongRepeat total testosterone on at least two separate occasions when < 12 nmol/L and before starting testosterone therapy.StrongUse 12 nmol/L total testosterone (3.5 ng/mL) as a reliable threshold to diagnose late onset hypogonadism (LOH).StrongMeasure sex hormone-binding globulin and free-testosterone calculation when indicatedStrongAnalyse luteinising hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone serum levels to differentiate between the different types of hypogonadism.StrongMeasure prolactin (PRL) levels if evidence of low sexual desire (or other suggestive signs/symptoms) and secondary hypogonadism is present.StrongPerform pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in secondary hypogonadism, with elevated PRL or symptoms specific of a pituitary mass and/or presence of other anterior pituitary hormone deficiency.StrongPerform pituitary MRI in secondary severe hypogonadism (total testosterone < 6 nmol/L).WeakScreeningScreen for late onset hypogonadism (LOH) only in symptomatic men.StrongDo not use structured interviews and self-reported questionnaires for systematic screening for LOH as they have a low specificity.Strong Figure 1: Diagnostic evaluation of Late-Onset Hypogonadism TT = total testosterone; cFT = calculated free testosterone; PRL = prolactin; SHBG = sex hormone-binding globulin; LH = luteinising hormone; MRI = Magnetic resonance imaging. 