6.7. Anorgasmia. 6.7.1. Definition and classification Anorgasmia is the perceived absence of orgasm and can give rise to anejaculation. Regardless of the presence of ejaculation, anorgasmia can be a lifelong (primary) or acquired (secondary) disorder [208]. 6.7.2. Pathophysiology and risk factors Primary anorgasmia starts from a man’s first sexual intercourse and lasts throughout his life, while secondary anorgasmia patients should have a normal period before the problem starts [782]. Substance abuse, obesity and some non-specific psychological aspects, such as anxiety and fear, are considered risk factors for anorgasmia. Only a few studies have described anorgasmia alone and generally, it has been considered a symptom linked to ejaculatory disorders, especially with DE, and therefore, they are believed to share the same risk factors. However, psychological factors are for 90% of anorgasmia problems [783]. The causes of delayed orgasm and anorgasmia are shown in Table 15 [782]. Table 15: Causes of delayed orgasm and anorgasmia [782] Causes of delayed orgasm and anorgasmiaEndocrineTestosterone deficiencyHypothyroidismMedicationsAntidepressantsAntipsychoticsOpioidsPsychosexual causesHyperstimulationPenile sensation loss 6.7.3. Disease management The psychological/behavioural strategies for anorgasmia are similar to those for DE. The patient and his partner should be examined physically and psychosexually in detail, including determining the onset of anorgasmia, medication and disease history, penile sensitivity and psychological issues. Adjunctive laboratory tests can also be used to rule out organic causes, such as testosterone, prolactin and TSH levels. Patients who have loss of penile sensitivity require further investigations [782]. 6.7.3.1. Psychological/behavioural strategies Lifestyle changes can be recommended to affected individuals, including changing masturbation style, taking steps to improve intimacy, and decreasing alcohol consumption. Several psychotherapy techniques or their combinations have been offered, including alterations in arousal methods, reduction of sexual anxiety, role-playing an exaggerated orgasm and increased genital stimulation [744,784]. However, it is difficult to determine the success rates from the literature. 6.7.3.2. Pharmacotherapy Several drugs have been reported to reverse anorgasmia, including cyproheptadine, yohimbine, buspirone, amantadine and oxytocin [785-790]. However, these reports are generally from case-cohort studies and drugs have limited efficacy and significant adverse effect profiles. Therefore, current evidence is not strong enough to recommend drugs to treat anorgasmia. 6.7.3.3. Management of infertility If patients fail the treatment methods mentioned above, penile vibratory stimulation, electro-ejaculation or TESE are options for sperm retrieval in anorgasmia cases [782]. 