6.8. Haemospermia. 6.8.1. Definition and classification Haemospermia is defined as the appearance of blood in the ejaculate. Although it is often regarded as a symptom of minor significance, blood in the ejaculate causes anxiety in many men and may indicate underlying pathology [231]. 6.8.2. Pathophysiology and risk factors Several causes of haemospermia have been acknowledged and can be classified into the following sub-categories; idiopathic, congenital malformations, inflammatory conditions, obstruction, malignancies, vascular abnormalities, iatrogenic/trauma and systemic causes (Table 16) [791]. Table 16: Pathology associated with haemospermia [791-794] CategoryCausesCongenitalSeminal vesicle (SV) or ejaculatory duct cystsInflammatoryUrethritis, prostatitis, epididymitis, tuberculosis, CMV, HIV, Schistosomiasis, hydatid, condyloma of urethra and meatus, urinary tract infectionsObstructionProstatic, SV and ejaculatory duct calculi, post-inflammatory, seminal vesicle diverticula/cyst, urethral stricture, utricle cyst, BPHTumoursProstate, bladder, SV, urethra, testis, epididymis, melanomaVascularProstatic varices, prostatic telangiectasia, haemangioma, posterior urethral veins, excessive sex or masturbationTrauma/iatrogenicPerineum, testis, instrumentation, post-haemorrhoid injection, prostate biopsy, vaso-venous fistulaSystemicHypertension, haemophilia, purpura, scurvy, bleeding disorders, chronic liver disease, renovascular disease, leukaemia, lymphoma, cirrhosis, amyloidosisIdiopathic- The risk of any malignancy in patients presenting with haemospermia is approximately 3.5% (0-13.1%) [793,795]. In a study in which 342 patients with haemospermia were included, the most relevant aetiology for haemospermia was inflammation/infection (49.4%) while genitourinary cancers (i.e., prostate and testis) only accounted for 3.2% of the cases [796]. 6.8.3. Investigations As with other clinical conditions, a systematic clinical history and assessment is undertaken to help identify the cause of haemospermia. Although the differential diagnosis is extensive, most cases are caused by infections or other inflammatory processes [231]. The basic examination of haemospermia should start with a thorough symptom-specific and systemic clinical history. The first step is to understand if the patient has true haemospermia. Pseudo-haemospermia may occur as a consequence of haematuria or even suction of a partner’s blood into the urethra during copulation [754,797,798]. A sexual history should be taken to identify those whose haemospermia may be a consequence of a STI. Recent foreign travel to areas affected by schistosomiasis or tuberculosis should also be considered. The possibility of co-existing systemic diseases such as hypertension, liver disease and coagulopathy should be investigated along with systemic features of malignancy such as weight loss, loss of appetite or bone pain. Examination of the patient should also include measurement of blood pressure, as there have been several case reports suggesting an association between uncontrolled hypertension and haemospermia [799,800]. Most authors who propose an investigative baseline agree on the initial diagnostic tests, but there is no consensus in this regard [791,792,795,797]. Urinalysis should be performed along with sending the urine for culture and sensitivity testing, as well as microscopy. If tuberculosis or schistosomiasis is the suspected cause, the semen or prostatic secretions should be sent for analysis. A full sexually-transmitted disease screen, including first-void urine as well as serum and genitourinary samples, should be tested for Chlamydia, Ureaplasma and Herpes Simplex virus. Using this strategy, it may be possible to find an infectious agent among cases that would have been labelled as idiopathic haemospermia [801]. Serum PSA should be taken in men aged > 40 years who have been appropriately counselled [232]. Blood work, including a full blood count, liver function tests, and a clotting screen should be taken to identify systemic diseases. The question of whether further investigation is warranted depends on clinician judgment, patient age and an assessment of risk factors [791]. Digital rectal examination should also be performed, and the meatus re-examined after DRE for bloody discharge [802]. Detection of a palpable nodule in the prostate is important because an association between haemospermia and PCa has been postulated, although not completely proven. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is being increasingly used as a definitive means to investigate haemospermia. The multiplanar ability of MRI to accurately represent structural changes in the prostate, seminal vesicles, ampulla of vas deferens, and ejaculatory ducts has enabled the technique to be particularly useful in determining the origin of midline or paramedian prostatic cysts and in determining optimal surgical management [803]. The addition of an endorectal coil can improve diagnostic accuracy for identifying the site and possible causes of haemorrhage [804]. Cystoscopy has been included in most suggested investigative protocols in patients with high-risk features (patients who are refractory to conservative treatment and who have persistent haemospermia). It can provide valuable information as it allows direct visualisation of the main structures in the urinary tract that can be attributed to causes of haemospermia, such as polyps, urethritis, prostatic cysts, foreign bodies, calcifications and vascular abnormalities [805,806]. With the advancement of optics, the ability to create ureteroscopes of diameters small enough to allow insertion into the ejaculatory duct and seminal vesicles has been made possible [806,807]. In a prospective study, 106 patients with prolonged haemospermia underwent transrectal US and seminal vesiculoscopy. With both methods combined, the diagnosis was made in 87.7% of patients. When compared head-to-head, the diagnostic yield for TRUS vs. seminal vesiculoscopy was 45.3% and 74.5%, respectively (P < 0.001) [808]. Melanospermia is a consequence of malignant melanoma involving the genitourinary tract and is a rare condition that has been described in two case reports [809,810]. Chromatography of the semen sample can be used to distinguish the two by identifying the presence of melanin if needed. 6.8.4. Disease management Conservative management is generally the primary treatment option when the patients are aged < 40 years and have a single episode of haemospermia. The primary goal of treatment is to exclude malignant conditions like prostate and bladder cancer and treat any other underlying cause. If no pathology is found, then the patient can be reassured [231,791]. Middle-aged patients with recurrent haemospermia warrant more aggressive intervention. Appropriate antibiotic therapy should be given to patients who have urogenital infections or STIs. Urethral or prostate varices or angiodyplastic vessels can be fulgurated, whereas cysts, either of the seminal vesicles or prostatic urethra, can be aspirated transrectally [231]. Ejaculatory duct obstruction is managed by transurethral incision at the duct opening [811,812]. Systemic conditions should be treated appropriately [795,798,813,814]. Defining a management algorithm for haemospermia is based on the patient's age and degree of haemospermia. Patients often find blood in the ejaculate alarming, and investigations should be aimed at excluding a serious, despite infrequent, underlying cause (e.g., cancer), while at the same time preventing over-investigation and alleviating patient anxiety. The literature describes a multitude of causes for haemospermia, although many of these are not commonly found after investigation. However, men may be stratified into higher-risk groups according to several factors including: age > 40 years, recurrent or persistent haemospermia, the actual risk for PCa (e.g., positive family history), and concurrent haematuria. Based on the literature, a management algorithm is proposed (Figure 8) [795,798,813,814]. Figure 8: Management algorithm for haemospermia [795,798,813,814]  STI = Sexually transmitted infections; PSA = Prostate specific antigen; DRE = Digital rectal examination; US = Ultrasonography; TRUS = Transrectal ultrasonography; MRI = Magnetic resonance imaging. 6.8.5. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the investigation and management of haemospermia Summary of evidenceLEWhile haemospermia has traditionally been attributed to benign causes, it is a potential indicator warranting thorough diagnostic evaluation and, if necessary, targeted treatment.3The principal objective of treatment is to rule out malignancies, while addressing any other underlying causes as well.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform a full medical and sexual history with detailed physical examination.StrongUse a risk-stratification system to manage the disease systematically.Weak 