8.1. Congenital penile curvature. 8.1.1. Epidemiology/aetiology/pathophysiology Congenital penile curvature (CPC) is a rare condition, with a reported incidence of < 1% [838], although some studies have reported higher prevalence rates of 4-10%, in the absence of hypospadias [839]. Congenital penile curvature results from disproportionate development of the tunica albuginea of the corporal bodies and is not associated with urethral malformation. In most cases, the curvature is ventral, but it can also be lateral or, more rarely, dorsal [840]. 8.1.2. Diagnostic evaluation Taking a medical and sexual history is usually sufficient to establish a diagnosis of CPC. Patients usually present after reaching puberty as the curvature becomes more apparent with erections and sexual activity. The more severe curvatures can make intercourse difficult or impossible. Physical examination and photographic documentation during erection (preferably after intracavernous injection [ICI] of vasoactive drugs) are both mandatory to document the curvature and exclude other pathologies [840]. 8.1.3. Disease management Surgery is the definitive treatment for this disorder and can be deferred until after puberty. However, a survey has suggested that men with untreated ventral penile curvature report more dissatisfaction with penile appearance, increased difficulty with intercourse, and psychological problems; supporting surgical correction of CPC in childhood, although this should be discouraged as penile growth will not have maximised [841]. Surgical treatments for CPC generally share the same principles as in PD. Plication techniques (Nesbit, 16-dot, Yachia, Essed-Schröeder, and others) with or without neurovascular bundle elevation (medial/lateral) and complete penile degloving, have been described [842-851]. Other approaches are based on corporal body de-rotation with different technical refinements that enable correction of a ventral curvature, with reported minimal narrowing and shortening [852-855]. There are no direct comparative studies; therefore, no single technique can be recommended for surgical correction. 8.1.4. Summary of evidence and recommendation for diagnosis and treatment of congenital penile curvature Summary of evidenceLEMedical and sexual history are usually sufficient to establish a diagnosis of CPC. Physical examination and photographic documentation during erection (preferably after ICI of vasoactive drugs) are mandatory to document the curvature.3Surgery is the only treatment option for CPC, which should be deferred until after puberty and performed at any time in adult life in individuals with significant functional impairment during intercourse.3 8.1.5. Recommendation for the treatment of congenital penile curvature RecommendationStrength ratingUse the Nesbit procedure or plication techniques with or without neurovascular bundle dissection (medial/lateral) for satisfactory curvature correction.Strong 