5.1. Screening and individual early detection. The diagnostic pathway for PCa aims for timely detection of significant PCa, while leaving insignificant PCa undetected, balancing diagnostic accuracy with the burden on an individual and healthcare provider. Patient-specific factors such as lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), family history, age, and comorbidity should always be considered. Men may enter the diagnostic pathway through different indications, including clinical symptoms, opportunistic early detection (individual), or screening (population-based). The prevalence of PCa and significant PCa is different dependent on the indication, resulting in different yields of the subsequent diagnostic pathway. 5.1.1. Clinical Symptoms Localised PCa is usually asymptomatic. Local progression may cause symptoms such as LUTS, erectile dysfunction (ED), retention, pain, or haematuria. Bone metastases may cause pain or spinal cord compression. Digital rectal examination (DRE) and PSA are usually part of the initial diagnostic work-up in these cases, after which a further diagnostic algorithm may be initiated. Definitive diagnosis normally depends on histopathological verification in prostate biopsy cores. However, men with high suspicion of malignancy (e.g. malignant feeling prostate, PSA >100 ng/mL and a positive bone scan might avoid a biopsy especially if pre-existing comorbidities would exclude second-line treatments. 5.1.2. Individual early detection Early detection may be initiated on an individual level. Men with risk factors include age > 50 years; men from 45 years of age with a family history of PCa; men of African descent from 45 years of age; men carrying BRCA2 mutations from 40 years of age [130,131]. The risk of detecting clinically insignificant cancers and possible overtreatment should be discussed along with the possibility of improved disease-specific mortality. It is difficult to accurately estimate the individual benefit or harm due to early detection for the individual man but the effect may be larger as diluting effects from intention-to-treat analyses in screening trials are not applicable (i.e. non-participation: no participation after screening invitation; contamination: screening occurring in control arm) [132]. Nevertheless, a comparison of systematic and opportunistic screening suggested over-diagnosis and mortality reduction in the systematic screening group compared to a higher over-diagnosis with only a marginal survival benefit, at best, in the opportunistic screening regimen [133]. Baseline PSA may be used to predict PCa mortality after fifteen to twenty yrs. Follow-up intervals of two years may be offered to those initially at risk (PSA > 1 ng/mL at 40 years; PSA > 2 ng/mL at 60 years) [134,135]. The age at which attempts an early diagnosis should be stopped remains controversial, but an individual’s life expectancy must definitely be taken into account. Men who have less than a fifteen-year life expectancy are unlikely to benefit, based on data from the Prostate Cancer Intervention Versus Observation Trial (PIVOT) and the European Randomized Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) trials. Furthermore, although there is no simple tool to evaluate individual life expectancy, co-morbidity is at least as important as age. A detailed review can be found in Section 6.1 ‘Estimating life expectancy and health status’ and in the SIOG Guidelines [136]. Informed men with one of the risk factors above, a life expectancy of > fifteen years and requesting investigation should be given a PSA test and undergo a DRE, after which a further diagnostic algorithm may be initiated [137].  Figure 5.1 Presents a flow diagram for deciding on prostate biopsy * PSA >50, cT3-4** If MRI not available / possible 5.1.3. Population-based screening Population or mass screening is defined as the ‘systematic examination of asymptomatic men to identify individuals at risk for a specific disease’ and is usually initiated by health authorities. The co-primary objectives are: reduction in mortality due to PCa;a maintained quality of life (QoL) as expressed by QoL-adjusted gain in life years (QALYs). Screening for PCa remains one of the most controversial topics in the urological literature [138]. A Cochrane review of randomised PCa screening trials with PCa mortality as endpoint was published in 2013 [139] and updated in 2018 [140,141]. The main findings of the updated publication from the results of five RCTs, randomising more than 721,718 men, are: Screening is associated with an increased diagnosis of PCa (Incidence ratio [IR]: 1.23 95% CI: 1.03–1.48).Screening is associated with detection of more localised disease (RR: 1.39, [1.09–1.79]) and less advanced PCa (T3–4, N1, M1; RR: 0.85 [0.72–0.99]).No PCa-specific survival benefit was observed (IR: 0.96 [0.85–1.08]). This was the main endpoint in all trials.No overall survival (OS) benefit was observed (IR: 0.99, 95% CI: 0.98–1.01). None of the trials were designed/powered for this endpoint. The included studies are different regarding multiple aspects including trial size, time periods, age groups, participation/compliance rates, previous screening rates (opportunistic testing in control arm, ‘contamination’), one-time vs. repeat screening, and the applied diagnostic pathway. These differences account for discrepancies in results between single studies and the Cochrane review aggregated findings. The ERSPC study started in the early 90’s, included >182,000 European men, found a significant reduction in PCa mortality due to screening. ERSPC applied a mainly PSA-based screening protocol (cut-off 3.0–4.0 ng/mL followed by systematic sextant prostate biopsy, every two to four years in men aged 50–74) [142] The contamination rate was relatively low when compared to other large studies such as the Prostate Lung Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) screening trial [142]. A limitation is the heterogeneity in patient groups and the applied screening protocols. Since 2013, data have been updated with sixteen years of follow-up [142]. With extended follow-up, the mortality reduction (21% and 29% after non-compliance adjustment) remains unchanged. However, the number needed to screen (NNS) and to treat is decreasing and is now below the NNS observed in breast cancer trials [142,143] (Table 5.1). Table 5.1: Follow-up data from the ERSPC study [142] Years of follow-upNumber needed to screenNumber needed to treat91,41048119793513781271657018 In the Rotterdam section of the ERSPC, with 21 years follow-up, the risk ratio of death due to PCa was 0.73 in the screening group, with number needed to invite of 246 and number needed to diagnose (NND) of fourteen to prevent one death due to PCa [144]. To prevent one metastasized case NNS was 121 and NND seven. In the Goteborg screening trial, with eighteen years of follow-up, the ratio of death from PCa for the screening group compared with the control group was 0.65 (95% CI: 0.49–0.87) and for men starting screening at age 55–59 it was 0.47 (95% CI: 0.29–0.78) [145]. The number needed to invite was 231; the NND ten. The benefit of screening in reducing PCa-specific mortality (PCSM) and the even more favourable impact on metastases rates, is counter-balanced by the side effects of screening such as increased diagnosis rates, which has led to over-treatment of low-risk PCa, and subsequent treatment-related side-effects [146]. Regarding QoL, the beneficial effects of screening and the side effects seem to balance out, resulting in limited overall impact on the invited population [146,147]. Recognition of the harms of over-diagnosis and over-treatment had led to a redesign in the pathway for early detection of PCa including identification of specific risk groups, individualised re-testing interval, improved indication for biopsy using risk calculators and/or MRI, targeted biopsies, and the application of AS for low-risk disease. After a negative screening, PSA measurement and DRE need to be repeated [148], but the optimal intervals for PSA testing and DRE follow-up are unknown as they varied between several prospective screening trials. A risk-adapted strategy might be a consideration, based on the initial PSA level. Men with a baseline PSA < 1 ng/mL at 40 years or < 2 ng/mL at 60 years are at decreased risk of PCa metastasis or death from PCa several decades later [46,135]. The retesting interval can therefore be every two years for those initially at increased risk or postponed up to eight years for those at low-risk [149]. An analysis of ERSPC data supports a recommendation for an eight-year screening interval in men with an initial PSA concentration < 1 ng/mL; fewer than 1% of men with an initial PSA concentration < 1 ng/mL were found to have a concentration above the biopsy threshold of 3 ng/mL at four-year follow-up; the cancer detection rate by eight years was close to 1% [150]. The long-term survival and QoL benefits of extended PSA re-testing (every eight years) remain to be proven at a population level. 5.1.4. Screening in patients with BRCA mutations The IMPACT study evaluates targeted PCa screening using PSA in men aged 40–69 years with germline BRCA1/2 mutations (annually, biopsy recommended if PSA > 3.0 ng/mL). After three years of screening, BRCA2 mutation carriers were associated with a higher incidence of PCa, a younger age of diagnosis, and more clinically significant tumours compared with non-carriers [131,151]. The influence of BRCA1 mutations on PCa remained unclear. No differences in age or tumour characteristics were detected between BRCA1 carriers and BRCA1 non-carriers. The mismatch repair cohort of IMPACT in men with MSH2 and MSH6 pathogenic variants found a higher incidence of significant PCa vs. non-carriers [152]. 5.1.5. Guidelines for individual early detection RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not subject men to prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing without counselling them on the potential risks and benefits.StrongOffer an individualised risk-adapted strategy for early detection to a well-informed man with a life-expectancy of at least fifteen years.WeakOffer early PSA testing to well-informed men at elevated risk of having PCa:men from 50 years of age;men from 45 years of age and a family history of PCa;men of African descent from 45 years of age;men carrying breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2) mutations from 40 years of age.StrongOffer a risk-adapted strategy (based on initial PSA level), with follow-up intervals of twoyears for those initially at risk:men with a PSA level of < 1 ng/mL at 40 years of age;men with a PSA level of < 2 ng/mL at 60 years of age;Postpone follow-up up to eight years in those not at risk.WeakStop early diagnosis of PCa based on life expectancy and performance status; men who have a life-expectancy of < fifteen years are unlikely to benefit.Strong 5.1.6. Genetic testing for inherited prostate cancer Increasing evidence supports the implementation of genetic counselling and germline testing in early detection and PCa management [153]. Several commercial screening panels are now available to assess the main PCa risk genes [154]. However, it remains unclear when germline testing should be considered and how this may impact localised and metastatic disease management. Germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations occur in approximately 0.2% to 0.3% of the general population [155]. It is important to understand the difference between somatic testing, which is performed on the tumour, and germline testing, which is performed on blood or saliva and identifies inherited mutations. Genetic counselling is required prior to and after undergoing germline testing. Germline mutations can drive the development of aggressive PCa. Therefore, the consensus is the following men, with a personal or family history of PCa or other cancer types arising from DNA repair gene mutations should be considered for germline testing: Men with metastatic PCa who are candidates for targeted treatment;Men with BRCA mutations on somatic testing;Men with multiple family members diagnosed with csPCa at age < 60 years or a family member who died from PCa;Men with a family history of high-risk germline mutations or a family history of multiple cancers on the same side of the family. Further research in this field (including not so well-known germline mutations) is needed to develop screening, early detection and treatment paradigms for mutation carriers and family members. 5.1.7. Guidelines for germline testing* RecommendationsStrength ratingConsider germline testing in men with multiple family members diagnosed with PCa at age < 60 years or a family member who died from PCa.WeakOffer germline testing in men with a family history of high-risk germline mutations or a family history of multiple cancers on the same side of the family.StrongOffer germline testing to patients with breast cancer gene (BRCA) mutations on somatic testingStrong *Genetic counselling is required prior to germline testing. 