5.7. What diagnostic pathway in clinical practice?. The ‘combined pathway’, in which patients with a positive MRI undergo combined systematic and targeted biopsy, and patients with a negative MRI undergo systematic biopsy, maximises the detection of ISUP grade group ≥2 cancers. However, it has the disadvantage of leading to a greater detection of ISUP grade group 1 cancers and of referring all patients with a clinical suspicion of cancer to biopsy. Given the growing concerns about over-detection of insignificant PCa, the development of AS protocols in patients with ISUP grade group 2 cancers (see section 6.2.1.2.1) and the grade shift induced by MRI-targeted biopsy (see section 5.5.5) the clinical relevance of a diagnostic strategy aimed only at maximising the detection of ISUP grade group ≥ 2 cancers is questionable [364,365]. The ‘MRI pathway’ in which patients with a positive MRI undergo only MRI-targeted biopsy and patients with a negative MRI are not biopsied at all could avoid biopsy in 21-49% of the patients if a PI-RADS threshold of ≥3 is used to trigger biopsy [121,186,189,190], at the cost of missing some significant cancers, especially in biopsy-naïve patients or in highly selected populations with high prevalence of csPCa (in which the MRI NPV decreases) [284,366]. Several alternative MRI-directed diagnostic pathways can be envisaged to correct these limitations, for example by selecting patients for biopsy based on a combination of MRI findings and clinical data or by adding perilesional sampling to MRI-targeted biopsy. The best pathway remains unclear as prospective evaluations are lacking. Interestingly, in a study different MRI-directed pathways were compared to the classical combined pathway in a retrospective cohort of 499 men. The highest clinical utility above a risk threshold of 6.25% was obtained by a risk-based pathway in which patients with a PI-RADS score of 1-3 and a low-risk profile (PSA-D<0.15 ng/ml/cc, negative DRE, no family history, no ASAP or ISUP1 cancer at prior biopsy) could forgo biopsy while the others underwent combined systematic and MRI-targeted biopsy. In this pathway, biopsy could have been avoided in 99 men (19%) while missing ISUP grade group ≥ 2 cancers in only 6 men (1.2%) [367]. 5.7.1. Repeat biopsy after negative biopsy During follow-up after negative systematic biopsy, the incidence of PCa is higher, but the risk of PCa death is lower than the population average [368]. Men with prior negative systematic biopsy and persistent suspicion of PCa should have an MRI if not already performed. Significant PCa may still be present in men with abnormal MRI and negative targeted biopsy [369]. Follow-up or direct repeat biopsy should be considered dependent on risk factors (e.g. PSA density, PIRADS). In a contemporary series of biopsies the likelihood of finding a csPCa after follow-up biopsy after a diagnosis of atypical small acinar proliferation and high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) was only 6-8%, not significantly different from follow-up biopsies after a negative biopsy [370,371]. The added value of other biomarkers remains unclear (see Sections 5.2.5.1 and 5.2.5.2). 5.7.2. Saturation biopsy The incidence of PCa detected by saturation repeat biopsy (> 20 cores) is 30–43% and depends on the number of cores sampled during earlier biopsies [372]. Saturation biopsy may be performed with the transperineal technique, which detects an additional 38% of PCa. The rate of urinary retention varies substantially from 1.2% to 10% [235,373]. However, given the very low risk of subsequent csPCa after a negative biopsy and/or in case of negative MRI, the clinical utility of saturation biopsy in the repeat biopsy setting remains uncertain in the current MRI-driven diagnostic pathway and such schemes should not be routinely used [374]. 5.7.3. Seminal vesicle biopsy Indications for SV (staging) biopsies are poorly defined. At a PSA of > 15 ng/mL, the odds of tumour involvement are 20–25% [375]. A SV staging biopsy is only useful if it has a decisive impact on treatment, such as ruling out radical tumour resection or for potential subsequent RT. Its added value compared with MRI is questionable. 5.7.4. Transition zone biopsy Transition zone sampling during baseline biopsies has a low detection rate and should be limited to MRI detected lesions or repeat template biopsies [376]. 