5.1. Primary lesion. 5.1.1. Physical examination Primary penile carcinoma are usually clinically evident lesions often presenting as raised or ulcerous lesions which can be locally destructive [88]. It is critically important to note that the appearance of penile tumours can be heterogeneous and can sometimes be hidden under the foreskin in case of phimosis. Physical examination should include inspection and palpation of the entire penis (to identify potential skip lesions). The dimensions, anatomic location, and extent of local invasion should be noted, and assessment of stretched penile length is recommended. 5.1.2. Imaging of the primary tumour Physical examination is a reliable method for estimating penile tumour size and clinical T stage [89]. For distinguishing T1 from T2 disease, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) does not outperform physical examination. However, when there is uncertainty if the tumour invades the cavernosal bodies (cT3), and if organ-sparing treatment options (e.g., glansectomy) are considered, MRI can be helpful [90,91]. A SR showed a sensitivity and specificity of MRI in predicting corporal invasion of 80% (95% CI: 70–87%) and 96% (95% CI: 85–99%), respectively [92,93]. Magnetic resonance imaging can also provide useful information regarding resectability in case of large (T4) tumours with invasion in adjacent structures. Magnetic resonance imaging with and without artificial erection showed similar accuracy in local staging [93]. If MRI is not available, penile ultrasound (US) can be considered [94]. 5.1.3. Penile biopsy: indications A biopsy of the penile tumour should be obtained when there is doubt about the exact nature of the lesion. However, even in clinically obvious cases, histological information from a biopsy can facilitate treatment decisions (such as indications for surgical staging). Histological confirmation is also necessary to guide management when treatment is planned with topical agents, radiotherapy or laser surgery [88]. For technical and histopathological considerations for penile biopsy see Section 3.4.6. 