10.1.1. Epidemiology, aetiology, pathophysiology and Diagnosis. Ischaemic priapism is a persistent erection marked by rigidity of the corpora cavernosa and by little or no cavernous arterial inflow [1336]. Ischaemic priapism is the most common subtype of priapism, accounting for> 95% of all episodes [1336,1337]. In ischaemic priapism, there are time-dependent metabolic alterations within the corpus cavernosum progressively leading to hypoxia, hypercapnia, glucopenia and acidosis [1338,1339]. Ischaemic priapism that lasts beyond 4 hours is similar to a compartment syndrome and characterised by the development of ischaemia within the closed space of the corpora cavernosa, which severely compromises the cavernosal circulation. Emergency medical intervention is required to minimise irreversible consequences, such as smooth muscle necrosis, corporal fibrosis and the development of permanent erectile dysfunction (ED) [1340,1341]. The duration of ischaemic priapism represents the most significant predictor for irreversible consequences, thus including ED. In this context, interventions beyond 48-72 hours of onset may help to relieve the erection and pain, but have little clinical benefit in preventing long-term ED [1342]. No specific pathophysiological causes of ischaemic priapism can be identified in most cases [1336,1343], although the common aetiological factors include sickle cell disease (SCD), haematological dyscrasias, neoplastic syndromes, and several pharmacological agents (e.g., intracavernosal PGE1 therapy) (Table 35). Ischaemic priapism may occur (0.4-35%) after intracavernosal injection of erectogenic agents [1336,1340,1344-1346]. The risk is higher with papaverine-based combinations [1347], while the risk of priapism is < 1% following prostaglandin E1 injection [1348]. Second-generation antipsychotics (33.8%), other medications (11.3%), and alpha-adrenergic antagonists (8.8%) accounted for the greatest percentage of published drug-induced priapism cases [1349]. Isolated cases of priapism have been described in men who have taken PDE5Is [1336]. Data from the FDA Adverse Reporting System Public Dashboard showed that PDE5Is-induced priapism accounted for only 2.9% of drug-induced priapism. However, most of these men also had other risk factors for priapism, and it is unclear whether PDE5Is per se can cause ischaemic priapism [1336,1350]. Since most men who experience priapism following PDE5I treatment have additional risk factors for ischaemic priapism, PDE5Is use is usually not regarded as a risk factor in itself. In terms of haemoglobinopathies, SCD is the most common cause of priapism in childhood, accounting for 63% of cases. It is the primary aetiology in 23% of adult cases [1348]. Mechanisms of SCD-associated priapism may involve derangements of several signalling pathways in the penis [1351]. Contrary to traditional belief, maintenance of physiological testosterone levels does not cause priapism, but rather preserves penile homeostasis and promotes normal erectile function [1352,1353]. Testosterone deficiency is considered a controversial risk factor: it is prevalent in patients with SCD, but recent evidence indicates that it may not be a risk factor for priapism [1354]. Priapism resulting from metastatic or regional infiltration by tumour is rare and usually reflects an infiltrative process, more often involving the bladder and prostate as the primary cancer sites [1355]. In a large retrospective study including 412 men with ischaemic priapism, eleven (3.5%) had malignant priapism, of which seven cases were a consequence of local invasion while the others were secondary to haematological malignancy [1356]. The conventional therapeutic recommendations for pharmacological treatment are unlikely to be effective and all of these men should have MRI of the penis and be offered supportive care and medical intervention for their primary cancer. In selected cases where palliative treatment options fail to control penile pain, a palliative penectomy can be considered. Partial priapism, or idiopathic partial segmental thrombosis of the corpus cavemosum, is a rare condition. It is often classified as a subtype of priapism limited to a single crura without ischaemia, but rather a thrombus is present within the corpus cavernosum. Its aetiology is unknown, but bicycle riding, trauma, drug use, sexual intercourse, haematological diseases and α-blocker intake have all been associated with partial segmental thrombosis [1357]. The presence of a congenital web within the corpora is also a risk factor [1358]. Table 35: Aetiological factors for the development of priapism Aetiological factors for the development of priapismIdiopathic-Haematological dyscrasias, vascular and other disordersSCDthalassemialeukaemiamultiple myelomahaemoglobin Olmsted variantfat emboli during hyperalimentationhaemodialysisglucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiencyfactor V Leiden mutationvessel vasculitis(e.g., Henoch-Schönlein purpura; Behçet's disease; anti-phospholipid antibodies syndrome)Infections (toxin-mediated)scorpion stingspider biterabiesMetabolic disordersamyloidosisFabry’s diseasegoutNeurogenic disorderssyphilisspinal cord injurycauda equinasyndromeautonomic neuropathylumbar disc herniationspinal stenosiscerebrovascular accidentbrain tumourspinal anaesthesiaNeoplasms (metastatic or regional infiltration)prostateurethratestisbladderrectallung, kidneyMedicationsVasoactive erectile agents (i.e., papaverine, phentolamine, prostaglandin E1/alprostadil, combination of intracavernous therapies)α-adrenergic receptor antagonists (i.e., prazosin, terazosin, doxazosin and tamsulosin)Anti-anxiety agents (hydroxyzine)Anticoagulants (heparin and warfarin)Antidepressants and antipsychotics (i.e., trazodone, bupropion, fluoxetine, sertraline, lithium, clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, chlorpromazine, thioridazine, phenothiazines and methylphenidate)Antihypertensives (i.e., hydralazine, guanethidine and propranolol)Hormones (i.e., gonadotropin-releasing hormone and testosterone)Recreational drugs (i.e., alcohol, marijuana, cocaine [intranasal and topical], and crack, cocaine) 10.1.1.1. Summary of evidence on the epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology of ischaemic priapism Summary of evidenceLEIschaemic priapism is the most common type, accounting for more than 95% of all cases.1bIschaemic priapism is identified as idiopathic in most patients, while sickle cell disease is the most common cause in childhood.1bIschaemic priapism occurs relatively often (about 5%) after intracavernous injections of papaverine-based combinations, while it is rare (< 1%) after prostaglandin E1 monotherapy.2aPriapism is rare in men who have taken Phosphodiesterase Type 5 Inhibitors, with only sporadic cases reported.4 