4.1. Classification. The objective of a tumour classification system is to combine patients with a similar clinical outcome. This allows for discussion about prognosis with patients, the design of clinical trials on relatively homogeneous populations, the comparison of clinical and pathological data obtained from different hospitals across the world, and the development of recommendations for the treatment of these patient populations. Throughout these Guidelines the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) 8th edition (2017), the Tumour, Node, Metastasis (TNM) classification for staging of PCa (Table 4.1) [94] and the EAU risk group classification are used [95]. The latter classification is based on the grouping of patients with a similar risk of biochemical recurrence (BCR) after radical prostatectomy (RP) or external beam radiotherapy (EBRT). Changes in the diagnostic pathway, such as imaging (e.g., MRI, Prostate-Specific Membrane Antigen [PSMA] Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography [PET/CT] scan) and biopsy (e.g., increasing number of systematic biopsy cores, targeted biopsy) may cause a stage shift in risk classification systems [96]. Although the 2017 American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging 8th edition specifically states that clinical staging should be based on digital rectal examination (DRE) only, such an explicit comment is not made by the UICC. Since clinical stage as assessed by DRE only, is included in the EAU (D’Amico) risk group classification, cT-stage should be based on DRE findings and not on imaging. Additional staging information based on imaging should be reported separately. A non-palpable PCa with bilateral positive biopsies and extra-prostatic extension (EPE) on MRI would therefore be categorised as cT1c with a separate report of MRI findings. Table 4.1: Clinical Tumour Node Metastasis (TNM) classification of PCa  Clinical Tumour Node Metastasis (TNM) classification of PCaT - Primary Tumour (stage based on digital rectal examination [DRE] only)TXPrimary tumour cannot be assessedT0No evidence of primary tumourT1Clinically inapparent tumour that is not palpableT1aTumour incidental histological finding in 5% or less of tissue resectedT1bTumour incidental histological finding in more than 5% of tissue resectedT1cTumour identified by needle biopsy (e.g. because of elevated prostate-specific antigen [PSA])T2Tumour that is palpable and confined within the prostateT2aTumour involves one half of one lobe or lessT2bTumour involves more than half of one lobe, but not both lobesT2cTumour involves both lobesT3Tumour extends palpably through the prostatic capsuleT3aExtracapsular extension (unilateral or bilateral)T3bTumour invades seminal vesicle(s)T4Tumour is fixed or invades adjacent structures other than seminal vesicles: external sphincter, rectum, levator muscles, and/or pelvic wallN - Regional (pelvic) Lymph Nodes1NXRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessedN0No regional lymph node metastasisN1Regional lymph node metastasisM - Distant Metastasis2M0No distant metastasisM1Distant metastasisM1a Non-regional lymph node(s)M1b Bone(s)M1c Other site(s) 1 Metastasis no larger than 0.2 cm can be designated pNmi.2 When more than one site of metastasis is present, the most advanced category is used. (p)M1c is the most advanced category. Pathological staging (pTNM) is based on histopathological tissue assessment and largely parallels the clinical TNM, except for clinical T1 and T2 substages. Pathological stages pT1a/b/c do not exist and histopathologically confirmed organ-confined PCas after RP are pathological stage pT2. The current UICC no longer recognises pT2 substages [94]. Of note: the EANM recently proposed a molecular imaging TNM (‘miTNM’) classification, taking into account PSMA PET/CT findings [97]. The prognosis of the miT, miN and miM substages is likely to be better than their T, N and M counterparts due to the ‘Will Rogers phenomenon’; the extent of this prognosis shift remains to be assessed as well as its practical interest and impact [98]. This reclassification is not endorsed by the UICC or the AJCC. 