3.2.2. Classification. The term cryptorchidism is most often used synonymously for undescended testes. The most useful classification of undescended testes is distinguishing into palpable and non-palpable testes, and clinical management is decided by the location and presence of the testes (see Figure 1). Approximately 80% of all undescended testes are palpable [57]. Acquired undescended testes can be caused by entrapment after herniorrhaphy or spontaneously referred to as ascending testis. Palpable testes include true undescended testes and ectopic testes. Non-palpable testes include intra-abdominal, inguinal, absent, and sometimes also some ectopic testes. Most importantly, the diagnosis of palpable or non-palpable testis needs to be confirmed once the child is under general anaesthesia, as this is the first step of any surgical procedure for undescended testes. Figure 1: Classification of undescended testes 3.2.2.1. Palpable testes Undescended testes A true undescended testis is on its normal path of descent but is halted on its way down to the scrotum. Depending on the location, the testes may be palpable or not, as in the case of testes arrested in the inguinal canal. Ectopic testes If the position of a testis is outside its normal path of descent and outside the scrotum, the testis is considered to be ectopic. The most common aberrant position is in the superficial inguinal pouch. Sometimes an ectopic testis can be identified in a femoral, perineal, pubic, penile or even contralateral position. Usually, there is no possibility for an ectopic testis to descend spontaneously to the correct position; therefore, it requires surgical intervention. In addition, an ectopic testis might not be palpable due to its position. Retractile testes Retractile testes have completed their descent into a proper scrotal position but can be found again in a suprascrotal position along the path of their normal descent. This is due to an overactive cremasteric reflex [58]. Retractile testes can be easily manipulated down to the scrotum and remain there at least temporarily. They are typically normal in size and consistency. However, they may not be normal and should be monitored carefully since up to one-third can ascend and become undescended [59]. 3.2.2.2. Non-palpable testes Among the 20% of non-palpable testes, 50-60% are intra-abdominal, canalicular or peeping (right inside the internal inguinal ring). The remaining 20% are absent and 30% are atrophic or rudimentary. Intra-abdominal testes Intra-abdominal testes can be located in different positions, with most of them being found close to the internal inguinal ring. However, possible locations include the kidney, anterior abdominal wall, and retrovesical space. In the case of an open internal inguinal ring, the testis may be peeping into the inguinal canal. Absent testes Monorchidism can be identified in up to 4% of boys with undescended testes, and anorchidism (bilateral absence) in < 1%. Possible pathogenic mechanisms include testicular agenesis and atrophy after intrauterine torsion with the latter one most probably due to an in utero infarction of a normal testis by gonadal vessel torsion. The term “vanishing testis” is commonly used for this condition [60]. 