3.2.4. Management. Treatment should be started at the age of six months. After that age, undescended testes rarely descend [70]. Any kind of treatment leading to a scrotally positioned testis should be finished by twelve months, or eighteen months at the latest, because histological examination of undescended testes at that age has already revealed a progressive loss of germ cells and Leydig cells [71]. The early timing of treatment is also driven by the final adult results on spermatogenesis and hormone production, as well as on the risk of tumour development [72]. 3.2.4.1. Medical therapy Unfortunately, most of the studies on hormonal treatment have been of poor quality, with heterogeneous and mixed patient populations, testis location, schedules and dosages of hormonal administration. Additionally, long-term data are almost completely lacking. Short-term side effects of hormonal treatment include increased scrotal erythema and pigmentation, and induction of pubic hair and penile growth. Some boys experience pain after intramuscular injection of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). All of these tend to regress after treatment cessation [73,74]. 3.2.4.1.1. Medical therapy for testicular descent Hormonal therapy using hCG or gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is based on the hormonal dependence of testicular descent, but has a limited success rate of only 20% [75]. However, it must be taken into account that almost 20% of these descended testes have the risk of re-ascending later [76]. In general, success rates depend on testicular location. The higher the testis is located prior to therapy, the lower the success rate, suggesting that testicular position is an important determinant of success [73]. Some authors recommend combined hCG-GnRH treatment. Unfortunately, it is poorly documented and the treatment groups were diverse. Some studies reported successful descent in up to 38% of non-responders to monotherapy [77]. The Panel consensus is that endocrine treatment to achieve testicular descent is not recommended (LE: 4). Human chorionic gonadotropin Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) stimulates endogenous testosterone production and is administered by intramuscular injection. Several dose and administration schedules are reported. There is no proven difference between 1.5 IU and weight-based doses up to 3.0 IU every other day for fourteen days [78]. Similar response rates were achieved with 500 IU once weekly and 1.50 IU three times weekly [79]. However, there is evidence that dosing frequency might affect testicular descent rates. Fewer lower dose injections per week for five weeks seem to be superior to one higher dose every seven to ten days for three weeks with regard to testicular descent [80]. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues (e.g., buserelin and gonadorelin) are available as nasal sprays, thus avoiding painful intramuscular injections. A typical dosage regimen consists of 1.2 mg per day in three divided doses, for four weeks. Success rates are wide ranging, from 9 to 60%, due to multiple treatment strategies and heterogeneous patient populations [81]. 3.2.4.1.2. Medical therapy for fertility potential Hormonal treatment may improve fertility indices [81,82] and therefore serve as an additional tool to orchidopexy. There is no difference in treatment with GnRH before (neo-adjuvant) or after (adjuvant) surgical orchidolysis and orchidopexy in terms of increasing fertility index, which may be a predictor for fertility later in life [83]. It is still unknown whether this effect on testicular histology persists into adulthood but it has been shown that men who were treated in childhood with buserelin had better semen analyses compared with men who had childhood orchidopexy alone or placebo treatment [81]. It is reported that hCG treatment may be harmful to future spermatogenesis through increased apoptosis of germ cells, including acute inflammatory changes in the testes and reduced testicular volume in adulthood [84]. Identification of specific subgroups of boys with undescended testes who would benefit from such an approach using hormones is difficult. Since these important data on specific groups as well as additional support on the long-term effects are still lacking, the Nordic consensus does not recommend hormonal therapy [85]. The consensus of the Panel is to recommend endocrine treatment with GnRH analogues in a dosage described above for boys with bilateral undescended testes to preserve the fertility potential (LE: 4). 3.2.4.2. Surgical therapy If a testis has not concluded its descent at the age of six months (corrected for gestational age), and since spontaneous testicular descent is unlikely to occur after that age, surgery should be performed within the subsequent year, and by age eighteen months at the latest [72]. In addition, early orchidopexy can be followed by partial catch-up testicular growth, which is not the case in delayed surgery [83]. All these findings recommend performing early orchidopexy between the ages of six and twelve months [70]. But despite early and successful orchiopexy within the first year of life up to 25% of boys with non-syndromic undescended testes may be at risk for infertility based on hormonal and histological data, as a published series on 333 boys showed. This is especially true for bilateral cases, but in addition in about 5% of unilateral cases reduced numbers of germ cells were detected in testicular biopsies as well [86]. 3.2.4.2.1. Palpable testes Surgery for palpable testes includes orchidofunicolysis and orchidopexy, either via an inguinal or scrotal approach. The latter approach is mainly reserved for low-positioned, undescended testes, with the pros and cons of each method being weighed against each other [87]. 3.2.4.2.1.1. Inguinal orchidopexy Inguinal orchidopexy is a widely used technique with a high success rate of up to 92% [88]. Important steps include mobilisation of the testis and spermatic cord to the level of the internal inguinal ring, with dissection and division of all cremasteric fibres, to prevent secondary retraction and detachment of the gubernaculum testis. The patent processus vaginalis needs to be ligated proximally at the level of the internal ring, because an unidentified or inadequately repaired patent processus vaginalis is an important factor leading to failure of orchidopexy [89]. Any additional pathology has to be taken care of, such as removal of an appendix testis (hydatid of Morgagni). At this moment the size of the testis can be measured and the connection of the epididimis to the testis can be judged and described in the protocol. Some boys have a significant dissociation between testis and epididymis which is prognostically bad for fertility. Finally, the mobilised testicle needs to be placed in a sub-dartos pouch within the hemi-scrotum without any tension. If the length achieved using the above-mentioned technique is still inadequate, the Prentiss manoeuvre, which consists of dividing the inferior epigastric vessels and transposing the spermatic cord medially, in order to provide a straight course to the scrotum, might be an option [90]. With regard to fixation sutures, if required, they should be made between the tunica vaginalis and the dartos musculature [91]. Lymph drainage of a testis that has undergone surgery for orchidopexy may have changed from high retroperitoneal drainage to iliac and inguinal drainage, which might become important in the event of later malignancy [92]. 3.2.4.2.1.2. Scrotal orchidopexy Low-positioned, palpable undescended testis can be fixed through a scrotal incision including division of the gubernaculum, and the processus vaginalis needs to be probed to check for patency [93]. Otherwise, fixation in the scrotum is carried out correspondingly to the inguinal approach. In up to 20% of cases, an inguinal incision will be compulsory to correct an associated inguinal hernia [94]. Any testicular or epididymal appendages can be easily identified and removed. A systematic review shows that the overall success rates ranged from 88 to 100%, with rates of recurrence and post-operative testicular atrophy or hypotrophy < 1% [87]. Another systematic review and meta-analysis revealed similar outcome data regarding post-operative complications, including wound infection, testicular atrophy, testicular reascent, and hernia for palpable low positioned undescended testes. The only significant difference was the shorter operative time [95]. 3.2.4.2.2. Non-palpable testes For non-palpable testes, surgery must clearly determine whether a testis is present or not [96]. If a testis is found, the decision has to be made to remove it or bring it down to the scrotum. An important step in surgery is a thorough re-examination once the boy is under general anaesthesia, since a previously non-palpable testis might be identifiable and subsequently change the surgical approach to standard inguinal orchidopexy, as described above. Otherwise, the easiest and most accurate way to locate an intra-abdominal testis is diagnostic laparoscopy [97]. Subsequent removal or orchidolysis and orchidopexy can be carried out using the same approach to achieve the therapeutic aims [98]. Some tend to start with inguinal surgical exploration, with possible laparoscopy during the procedure [99]. If an ipsilateral scrotal nubbin is suspected, and contralateral compensatory testicular hypertrophy is present, a scrotal incision with removal of the nubbin, thus confirming the vanishing testis, is an option avoiding the need for laparoscopy [100]. During laparoscopy for non-palpable testes, possible anatomical findings include spermatic vessels entering the inguinal canal (40%), an intra-abdominal (40%) or peeping (10%) testis, or blind-ending spermatic vessels confirming vanishing testis (10%) [101]. If there is a vanishing testis, the procedure is finished once blind-ending spermatic vessels are clearly identified. If the vessels enter the inguinal canal, an atrophic testis may be found upon inguinal exploration or a healthy testis that needs to undergo standard orchidopexy [102]. A peeping testis can be placed down in the scrotum laparoscopically or via an inguinal incision [103]. Placement of an intra-abdominal testis can sometimes be a surgical challenge. Usually, testes lying > 2 cm above the internal inguinal ring may not reach the scrotum without division of the testicular vessels [104]. Under such circumstances, a Fowler-Stephens orchidopexy may be an option [105] (see Figure 2). Proximal cutting and transection of the testicular vessels, with conservation of the collateral arterial blood supply, via the deferential artery and cremasteric vessels comprise the key features of the Fowler-Stephens procedure. A modification with low spermatic vessel ligation has gained popularity, allowing blood supply from the testicular artery to the deferential artery. An additional advantage is the position of the peritoneal incision, leading to a longer structure, to ease later scrotal placement [106]. Due to the nature of these approaches the testis is at risk of hypotrophy or atrophy if the collateral blood supply is insufficient [107]. The testicular survival rate in the one-stage Fowler-Stephens technique varies between 50 and 65% based on post-operative Doppler-ultrasound findings [108]. For two-stage procedures success rates increase up to 90% [109]. The advantages of two-stage orchidopexy, with the second part done usually six months after the first, are to allow for development of collateral blood supply and to create greater testicular mobility [110]. In addition, preservation of the gubernaculum may also decrease the chance of testicular atrophy [111]. An alternative might be microsurgical auto-transplantation, which has a success rate of up to 90%. However, this approach requires skilled and experienced surgeons and is performed in a limited number of centres [112]. 3.2.4.2.3. Complications of surgical therapy Surgical complications are usually uncommon, with testicular atrophy being the most serious. A systematic review revealed an overall atrophy rate for primary orchidopexy of 1.83%, 28.1% for one-stage Fowler-Stephens procedure, and 8.2% for the two-stage approach [113]. Other rare complications comprise testicular ascent and vas deferens injury besides local wound infection, dehiscence, and haematoma. 3.2.4.2.4. Surgical therapy for undescended testes after puberty A study on 51 men diagnosed with inguinal unilateral undescended testis and a normal contralateral one, with no history of any previous therapy, demonstrated a wide range of changes upon histological evaluation. Nearly half of the study population still had significant germ cell activity at different maturation levels. Importantly, the incidence of intratubular germ cell neoplasia was 2% [114]. The Panel consensus recommends orchiectomy in post-pubertal boys with an undescended testis and a normal contralateral one in a scrotal position. Figure 2: Treatment of unilateral non-palpable undescended testes 