3.2.3. Diagnostic evaluation. History taking and physical examination are key in evaluating boys with undescended testes. Localisation studies using different imaging modalities are usually without any additional benefit. 3.2.3.1. History Caregivers should be asked for maternal and paternal risk factors, including hormonal exposure and genetic or hormonal disorders. If the child has a history of previously descended testes this might be suggestive of testicular ascent [61]. Prior inguinal surgery is indicative of secondary undescended testes due to entrapment. 3.2.3.2. Physical examination An undescended testis is pursued by carefully advancing the examining fingers along the inguinal canal towards the pubis region, perhaps with the help of lubricant. A possible inguinal testis can be felt to bounce under the fingers [62]. A non-palpable testis in the supine position may become palpable once the child is in a sitting or squatting position. If no testis can be identified along the normal path of descent, possible ectopic locations must be considered. In the event of unilateral non-palpable testis, the contralateral testis needs to be examined. Its size and location can have important prognostic implications. Any compensatory hypertrophy suggests testicular absence or atrophy [63]. Nevertheless, this does not preclude surgical exploration since the sign of compensatory hypertrophy is not specific enough [64,65]. In the event of bilateral undescended testes and any evidence or sign of DSDs, such as genital ambiguity, or scrotal hyperpigmentation, further evaluation including endocrinological and genetic assessment becomes mandatory [66]. 3.2.3.3. Imaging studies Imaging studies cannot determine with certainty that a testis is present or not [67]. Ultrasound (US) lacks the diagnostic sensitivity to detect the testis confidently or establish the absence of an intra-abdominal testis [68]. Consequently, the use of different imaging modalities, such as US or Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [69], for undescended testes is limited and only recommended in specific and selected clinical scenarios (e.g. identification of Müllerian structures in cases with suspicion of DSDs) [68]. 