5.3. Surgical treatment of benign prostatic obstruction. Surgical treatment is one of the cornerstones of LUTS/BPO management. Based on its ubiquitous availability, as well as its efficacy, monopolar TURP (M-TURP) has long been considered as the reference technique for the surgical management of LUTS/BPO. However, in recent years various techniques have been developed with the aim of providing a safe and effective alternative to M-TURP. Previously, the surgical section of the Guidelines was based on technology rather than surgical approach. As the clinical reality is primarily reflected by surgical approach and not necessarily by a specific technology, the chapter on surgical management has been restructured. It is now divided into the following five sections: Resection; Enucleation; Vaporisation; Alternative ablative techniques; and Non-ablative techniques.  In addition, most of the studies are restricted by prostate size, which is also reflected in the present Guidelines. Notably, only a small fraction of RCTs are performed in patients with a prostate > 80 mL; therefore, high-level evidence for larger prostates are limited. Based on Panel consensus, timeframes defining short-, mid- and long-term follow-up of patients submitted to surgical treatments are twelve, 36, and over 36 months, respectively. The durability of a technique is reflected by the re-operation rate during follow-up, the failure to wean patients off medication as well as the initiation of novel LUTS medication after surgery. However, for the majority of techniques only the re-operation rate is reported, and clinicians should inform patients that long-term surgical RCTs are often lacking. Some patients value sexual function and perceived higher safety over maximum efficacy and it is not therefore surprising that some patients consciously choose an alternative ablative or non-ablative technique despite the knowledge that it might not be their definitive treatment. In contrast, many urologists are critical about these procedures due to their inferior relief of BOO. Recommendations on new devices or interventions will only be included in the Guidelines once supported by a minimum level of evidence. To clarify this the Panel have published their position on certainty of evidence (CoE) [317]. In summary, a device or technology is only included once supported by RCTs looking at both efficacy and safety, with adequate follow-up, and secondary studies to confirm the reproducibility and generalisability of the first pivotal studies [317]. Otherwise, there is a danger that a single pivotal study can be overexploited by device manufacturers. Studies that are needed include proof of concept, RCTs on efficacy and safety, as well as cohort studies with a broad range of inclusion and exclusion criteria to confirm both reproducibility and generalisability of the benefits and harms [317]. The panel assesses the quality of all RCTs and if they do not meet the standard required the intervention will continue to have no recommendation i.e., an RCT does not guarantee inclusion in the Guidelines. In addition, the Guidelines continues to include techniques under investigation. These are devices or technologies that have shown promising results in initial studies; however, they do not meet the aforementioned criteria yet to provide a CoE which allows the Panel to regard these devices or technologies as recommended alternatives. To account for evolving evidence, recommendations for some techniques under investigation have been made; however, these techniques remain under investigation until further studies provide the recommended CoE. 