5.3.4. Alternative ablative techniques. 5.3.4.1. Aquablation – image guided robotic waterjet ablation: AquaBeam Mechanism of action: AquaBeam uses the principle of hydro-dissection to ablate prostatic parenchyma while sparing collagenous structures like blood vessels and the surgical capsule. A targeted high velocity saline stream ablates prostatic tissue without the generation of thermal energy under real-time transrectal ultrasound guidance. After completion of ablation haemostasis is performed with a Foley balloon catheter on light traction or diathermy or low-powered laser if necessary [508]. Efficacy: In a double-blind, multicentre, pivotal RCT, 181 patients with a prostate size of 30-80mL were randomised to TURP or Aquablation [509,510]. Mean total operative time was similar for Aquablation and TURP (33 vs. 36 minutes), but resection time was significantly lower for Aquablation (4 vs. 27 minutes). At six months patients treated with Aquablation and TURP experienced large IPSS improvements (-16.9 and -15.1, respectively), satisfying the non-inferiority hypothesis. At one year follow-up, mean IPSS reduction was 15.1 with a mean reduction in IPSS score of 67% for both groups. No significant difference in improvement of IPSS, QoL, Qmax and reduction of PVR was reported between the groups [511]. Improvements in IPSS and Qmax were maintained after five years in both groups [512]. Mean IPSS decrease were 16.9 and 15.1 points in the Aquablation and TURP groups, respectively. Similarly, 5-year improvements in Qmax were 125% and 89% compared to baseline for Aquablation and TURP, respectively. Over five years, surgical retreatments were 5.1% and 1.5% respectively [512]. Results of AquaBeam in patients with large prostates (80-150mL) were evaluated in a cohort study of 101 men (WATER II) [509]. After twelve months, significant improvements were seen in IPSS (mean decrease of 17 points), Qmax (increase of 12.5 cc/sec) and PVR (a drop of 171 cc in those with PVR > 100 at baseline). At 5-years follow-up, 3% of patients required surgical retreatment [513]. Urodynamic studies of 66 patients enrolled in the WATER trial at six months follow-up showed significant changes in pdetQmax (reductions of 35 and 34 cm H20, respectively) and large improvements in BOO index in both groups [514]. Tolerability and safety: Results for the WATER trial have shown comparable hospital stay and catheterisation duration (1.4 and 1 day, respectively) [509]. One case of blood transfusion was reported after Aquabeam and none after TURP. In a SR of seven patient groups involving 446 patients treated by aquablation, although there was a significant haemoglobin drop (2.06 g/dL), it did not translate into increased transfusion rates. In WATER, fewer men in the Aquablation group had a persistent Clavien-Dindo grade 1 or 2 or higher adverse event compared to TURP (26% vs. 42%) at three months. Among sexually active men the rate of anejaculation was lower in those treated with Aquablation compared to TURP (10% vs. 36%, respectively). There were no procedure-related adverse events after six months [511]. In patients with a prostate volume between 80-150 mL (WATERII trial), bleeding related events were observed in fourteen patients (13.9%) of which eight (7.9%) occurred prior to discharge and six (5.9%) occurred within one month of discharge. Blood transfusions were required in eight patients, return to the theatre for fulguration in three patients, and both transfusion and fulguration in two patients [515]. Maintenance of antegrade ejaculation was slightly lower in WATER II at 81% compared to 90% in the smaller prostates of WATER I [516]. In WATER II there was a 2% de novo incontinence rate at twelve months [517]. In an analysis of procedural differences including data from WATER I and II, compared to a single pass of ablation, the use of two or more passes during Aquablation resulted in lower IPSS scores by four points, and lower IPSS QoL scores by 0.7 points at 24 and 36 months. Similarly, 36-month Qmax values were higher by 5 ml/sec in those with two or more passes than in those with one pass [518]. Practical considerations: During long-term follow-up, aquablation provides non-inferior functional outcomes compared to TURP in patients with LUTS and a prostate volume between 30-80 mL. Additional longer term, higher quality follow-up is necessary to assess better the clinical value of aquablation. There are still concerns about management of bleeding and bladder neck cautery is often performed at the end of the procedure. Summary of evidenceLEAquablation appears to be as effective as TURP both subjectively and objectively.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer Aquablation* to patients with moderate-to-severe LUTS and a prostate volume of 30-80 mL as an alternative to transurethral resection of the prostate.WeakInform patients about the risk of bleeding and the lack of long-term follow-up data.Strong * Aquablation remains under investigation as evidence levels as described by Speakman et al. [317] has not been reached. 5.3.4.2. Prostatic artery embolisation Mechanism of action: Prostatic artery embolisation (PAE) can be performed as a day procedure under local anaesthesia with access through the femoral or radial arteries. Digital subtraction angiography displays arterial anatomy, and the appropriate prostatic arterial supply is selectively embolised to effect stasis in treated prostatic vessels. Different technical variations (including bead size) have been described for PAE, which needs specific training [519,520]. Efficacy: Superior efficacy of PAE compared with a sham procedure was found in a six-month randomised, single-blind, sham-controlled trial in 80 patients with LUTS, refractory to medical treatment. The decrease in IPSS at six months was 5.03 +/- 8.13 in the sham group and 17.1 +/- 7.25 in the PAE group [521]. A SR and meta-analysis including RCTs and two non-RCTs comparative studies (n = 708 patients) showed that TURP achieved a significantly higher mean post-operative difference for IPSS and IPSS-QoL, 3.80 and 0.73 points, respectively compared to PAE [522]. All of the functional outcomes assessed were significantly superior after TURP: 3.62 mL/s for Qmax, 11.51 mL for prostate volume, 11.86 mL for PVR, and 1.02 ng/mL for PSA [522]. According to a Cochrane network meta-analysis, PAE may result in little to no difference in urologic symptoms scores as well as QoL compared to TURP at short-term follow-up of three to twelve months [523]. A network meta-analysis included outcome data at three to six months follow-up and concluded that improvement of IPSS was similarly high after TURP and PUL. A meta-analysis of eleven RCTs comparing TURP and PAE found no significant difference between TURP and PAE for patient-reported outcomes including IPSS and QoL at twelve months. PAE was less effective regarding improvements in most functional outcomes such as maximum flow rate, prostate volume, and prostate-specific antigen [524]. A Cochrane review reported that compared to TURP, the impact on urological symptoms and QoL improvement as perceived by patients appears to be similar following PAE [525]. This review did reveal major uncertainty as to how major adverse events compare. According to a non-inferiority trial, 21% of patients who initially had PAE underwent TURP within two years [526] In a single-centre retrospective analysis of 75 PAE patients over a three-year period, PAE was shown to be a safe, effective, and durable treatment option for non-index patients with urinary retention (87% catheter free) or gross haematuria (resolved 87.5%) [527]. Tolerability and safety: Available RCTs, as well as SR and meta-analysis show conflicting results about the comparative rate of adverse events after PAE or TURP, depending on studies included, definition of adverse events, and follow-up. In a SR of comparative studies PAE resulted in significantly more adverse events than TURP/OP (41.6% vs. 30.4%). The frequency of AUR after the procedures was significantly higher in the PAE group (9.4% vs. 2.0%) [528]. In another compilation of studies, PAE was associated with significantly fewer overall adverse events but similar rates of severe side effects, as well as and shorter hospitalisation times (mean difference = -1.94 days), but longer procedural times (mean difference = 51.43 min) [529]. Another SR and meta-analysis of four studies (506 patients) comparing PAE and TURP found no significant difference in the post-operative complication rate between TURP and PAE [530]. According to a Cochrane network meta-analysis, PAE may also result in a large reduction in major adverse events than TURP, but the confidence interval includes substantial benefits and harms [523]. In addition, uncertainty exists about the effect of PAE on retreatment compared to TURP at follow-up from 12 to 60 months. A meta-analysis did reveal major uncertainty as to how major adverse events compare between TURP and PAE [525]. Concerning sexual adverse events, the mean differences in IIEF-5 score were not significantly different between TURP and PAE in a meta-analysis [529]. Another meta-analysis of two RCTs detected no difference in retrograde ejaculation rates [415]. Post-operative erectile function measured by IIEF-5 was in favour of PAE with mean difference in change of 2.56 points. In another updated meta-analysis PAE was consistently associated with lower sexual dysfunction than TURP (OR 0.24) [531]. According to a Cochrane network meta-analysis, uncertainty exists on the effect of PAE on erectile function and ejaculatory function as compared to TURP [523]. Concerns still exist about non-target embolisation, reported in earlier studies [532]; however, more recent studies report less incidents [522,533]. A SR of 22 studies reporting radiation exposure during PAE, with a twenty-fold range of exposures, estimated that the median risk for a 66-year-old patient of a cancer related death was 0.117%, equivalent to a reduced life expectancy of 5.4 days. Radiation exposure therefore should be part of the counselling for patients considered for PAE. These data suggest there is potential for significant radiation reduction in some centres using appropriate protocols [534]. Practical considerations: A multidisciplinary team approach of urologists and radiologists is mandatory and patient selection should be done by urologists and interventional radiologists. The investigation of patients with LUTS to indicate suitability for invasive techniques should be performed by urologists only. This technically demanding procedure should only be done by an interventional radiologist with specific mentored training and expertise in PAE [535]. There are data suggesting that larger prostates have a higher chance of a superior outcome with PAE in post hoc analysis of RCTs, but larger trials are required to clarify the most suitable patients for PAE [515,536]. Further data with medium- and long-term follow-up are still required and comparison with other minimally invasive techniques would be valuable. However, current evidence of safety and efficacy of PAE appears adequate to support the use of this procedure for men with moderate-to-severe LUTS provided proper arrangements for consent and audit are in place; therefore, a recommendation has been given, but PAE remains under investigation. Summary of evidenceLEProstatic artery embolisation is less effective than TURP at improving symptoms and urodynamic parameters such as flow rate.1aProcedural time is longer for PAE compared to TURP, but blood loss, catheterisation and hospitalisation time are in favour of PAE.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer prostatic artery embolisation (PAE)* to men with moderate-to-severe LUTS who wish to consider minimally invasive treatment options and accept less optimal outcomes compared with transurethral resection of the prostate.WeakPerform PAE only in units where the work up and follow-up is performed by urologists working collaboratively with trained interventional radiologists for the identification of PAE suitable patients.Strong * PAE remains under investigation 5.3.4.3. Alternative ablative techniques under investigation 5.3.4.3.1. Convective water vapour energy (WAVE) ablation: The Rezum system Mechanism of action: The Rezum system uses radiofrequency power to create thermal energy in the form of water vapour, which in turn deposits the stored thermal energy when the steam phase shifts to the liquid phase upon cell contact. The steam disperses through the tissue interstices and releases stored thermal energy onto prostatic tissue effecting cell necrosis. The procedure can be performed in an office-based setting. Usually, one to three injections are needed for each lateral lobe and one to two injections may be delivered into the median lobe (depending on the prostate size). Efficacy: In a multicentre RCT, 197 men were enrolled and randomised in a 2:1 ratio to treatment with water vapour energy ablation or sham treatment [537]. At three months relief of symptoms, (measured by a change in IPSS and Qmax) were significantly improved and maintained after WAVE therapy compared to the sham arm, although only the active treatment arm was followed up to twelve months. No relevant impact was observed on PVR. Quality of life outcome was significantly improved with a meaningful treatment response of 52% at twelve months. Further validated objective outcome measures such as BPH impact index (BPHII), Overactive Bladder Questionnaire Short Form for OAB bother, and impact on QoL and ICS Male Item Short Form Survey for male incontinence demonstrated improvements of symptoms at three months follow-up with sustained efficacy throughout the study period of twelve months. The reported two-year results in the Rezum cohort arm of the same study and the recently reported five-year results confirmed durability of the clinical outcome after convective water vapour energy ablation [538]. Surgical retreatment rate was 4.4% over five year. A Cochrane review found no studies comparing convective radiofrequency water vapour thermal therapy to any other active treatment form, such as TURP [539]. Another network meta-analysis included outcome data at three to six months follow-up and concluded that improvement of IPSS was similarly high after TURP and WAVE [540]. Objective outcomes (PVR and Qmax) were improved to the greatest extent after TURP, with moderate improvement after WAVE. Tolerability and safety: Safety profile was favourable with adverse events documented to be mild-to-moderate and resolving rapidly. Preservation of erectile and ejaculatory function after convective water vapour thermal therapy was demonstrated utilising validated outcome instruments such as IIEF and Male Sexual Health Questionnaire-Ejaculation Disorder Questionnaire [537]. Practical considerations: There are two SRs of the Rezum cohort studies. One concludes that Rezum provides improvement in BPH symptoms that exceeds established minimal clinically important difference thresholds, preserves sexual function, and is associated with low surgical retreatment rates over four years. Therefore, suggesting that it may be a valuable addition to the urological armamentarium to treat LUTS in men with BPH [541]. The other, a Cochrane review reported that the certainty of evidence ranged from moderate to very low, with study limitations and imprecision being the most common reasons for down-grading of the evidence [539]. A Cochrane network meta-analysis reported uncertainty about the effects of Rezum on retreatment compared to sham treatment at three months follow-up and the certainty of evidence is very low [523]. Randomised controlled trials against a reference technique are needed to confirm the first promising clinical results and to evaluate mid- and long-term efficacy and safety of water vapour energy treatment. 