7.3.6. Urinary diversion after radical cystectomy. Different types of segments of the intestinal tract can be used to reconstruct the urinary tract, including the ileum, colon and appendix, with ileum used in most cases. Several studies have compared advantages and disadvantages in terms of QoL, sexual function, urinary continence and body image between different urinary diversions [366], but further research evaluating the impact of tumour stage, functional- and socio-economic status are needed. 7.3.6.1. Different types of urinary diversion For the choice of urinary diversion, comorbidity, cardiac, pulmonary and cognitive function are important factors that should be considered, along with the patient’s social support and preference (see Section patient selection/comorbidities). Age > 80 years is often considered to be the threshold after which neobladder reconstruction is not recommended. However, there is no exact age for a strict contraindication [367]. Randomised controlled trials comparing conduit diversion with neobladder or continent cutaneous diversion have not been performed. 7.3.6.1.1. Uretero-cutaneostomy Ureteral diversion to the abdominal wall is the simplest form of cutaneous diversion. Operating time, complication rate, blood loss, transfusion rate, stay at intensive care and length of hospital stay are lower in patients treated with ureterocutaneostomy as compared to ileal conduit [368]. In frail patients and/or in those with a solitary kidney who need a supravesical diversion, uretero-cutaneostomy is the preferred procedure. In case patients have both kidneys and need a uretero-cutaneostomy, either one ureter, to which the other shorter one is attached end-to-side, is connected to the skin (trans-uretero-cutaneostomy) or both ureters may be directly anastomosed to the abdominal wall creating a stoma. Due to the smaller diameter of the ureters, stoma stenosis and ascending UTIs have been observed more frequently for this technique as compared to using small or large bowel to create an intestinal stoma [369]. 7.3.6.1.2. Ileal conduit The ileal conduit is an established option with well-known/predictable results. Early complications (30-day cut off, used in most publications) include UTIs, pyelonephritis, ureteroileal leakage and stenosis which occur in 48% of patients [370]. 7.3.6.1.3. Orthotopic neobladder According to Dutch-, German- and Spanish bladder cancer registry data, an orthotopic bladder substitution to the urethra is used in approximately 10–20% of both male and female patients. Emptying of the reservoir anastomosed to the urethra requires abdominal straining, and sphincter relaxation. The terminal ileum is the GI segment most often used for orthotopic bladder substitution. Early and late morbidity in up to 22% of patients is reported [371]. Various forms of UUT reflux protection, including a simple isoperistaltic tunnel, ileal intussusception, tapered ileal prolongation implanted subserosally, and direct (sub)mucosal or subserosal ureteral implantation, have been described [372,373]. According to the long-term results, the UUT is protected sufficiently by either method [371]. A study comparing cancer control and patterns of disease recurrence in patients with neobladder and ileal conduit showed no difference in CSS between the two groups when adjusting for pathological stage [374]. Urethral recurrence in neobladder patients seems rare (0.8–13.7% [pooled estimate of 4.6% in both male and female patients, also considering the significantly higher recurrence rates in male patients]) [375]. These results indicate that neobladder in male and female patients does not compromise the oncological outcome of cystectomy. 7.3.6.1.4. Continent cutaneous urinary diversion Continent cutaneous urinary diversion (a low-pressure detubularised ileal reservoir for self-catheterisation) and uretero-rectosigmoidostomy are rarely used techniques nowadays, due to their high complication rates, including stomal stenosis, incontinence in the continent cutaneous diversion, UUT infections and stone formation in case of uretero-rectosigmoidostomy [376]. 7.3.6.2. Patient selection Ensuring that patients make a well-informed decision about the type of urinary diversion is associated with less decision regret post-operatively, independent of the method selected [377]. Therefore, all applicable forms of urinary diversion should be discussed, taking into account patient preference, comorbidities, age and tumour characteristics. Diagnosis of an invasive urethral tumour prior to cystectomy leads to urethrectomy which is a contraindication for a neobladder reconstruction. Non-muscle-invasive BC in prostatic urethra or bladder neck biopsies does not necessarily preclude orthotopic neobladder substitution, provided that patients undergo regular follow-up cystoscopy and urinary cytology [378]. In women undergoing RC the rate of concomitant urethral malignancy has been reported to range from 12–16% [379]. Localisation of the primary tumour at the bladder neck correlated strongly with concomitant urethral malignancy. Bladder neck biopsies prior to RC are important in women scheduled for an orthotopic bladder substitute [380]. In the presence of positive LNs, orthotopic neobladder can be considered in case of N1 disease, but not in N2 or N3 tumours [381]. Oncological results after orthotopic neobladder or illial conduit are similar in terms of local or distant metastasis recurrence, but secondary urethral tumours seem less common in patients with a neobladder compared to those with conduits or continent cutaneous diversions [382]. Patients undergoing continent urinary diversion must be motivated to learn about their diversion and to be manually skilful to be able to deal with their diversion. Contraindications to continent urinary diversions include: debilitating neurological and psychiatric illnesses;limited life expectancy;severe impaired liver or renal function. Relative contraindications for an orthotopic neobladder are high-dose pre-operative RT, complex urethral strictures and severe urethral sphincter-related incontinence [383]. A retrospective study including 1,383 patients showed that the risk of a decline in estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) did not significantly differ after ileal conduit vs. neobladder in patients with pre- operative chronic kidney disease 2 (eGFR 60–89 mL/min/1.73 m2) or 3a (eGFR 45–59 mL/min/1.73 m2) [384]. Only age and anastomotic strictures were found to be associated with a decline in eGFR. Currently, it is not possible to recommend a particular type of urinary diversion. However, most institutions prefer ileal orthotopic neobladders and ileal conduits based on clinical experience. In selected patients, such as patients with a single kidney, uretero-cutaneostomy is surgically the least burdensome type of diversion. Recommendations related to RC and urinary diversions are listed in Section 7.3.10. 7.3.6.3. Peri-operative care Similar to other tumour types, such as colorectal cancer, the application of a multimodal prehabilitation programme (i.e. physiotherapy, nutritional intervention, cessation of smoking) may improve patient health status prior to surgery and subsequently reduce postoperative complication rates [385]. However, evidence on this is limited and randomised controlled trials are missing. Patients treated according to a ‘Fast track’/ERAS (Early Recovery After Surgery) protocol have shown to score better on the emotional and physical functioning scores and suffer less from wound healing disorders, fever and thrombosis [386]. Pre-operatively, the ERAS protocol recommends no bowel prepation or fasting. Other components are, for example, same day admission, as well as carbohydrate loading and a pre-operative exercise programme. Important post-operative components of the ERAS protocol are pain management, which involves reducing the use of opioids; increasing the use of high-dose acetaminophen and/or ketorolacs (only as breakthrough pain medication) and patients on ERAS experience more pain as compared to patients on a traditional protocol (Visual Analogue Scale [VAS] 3.1 vs. 1.1, p < 0.001), but post-operative ileus decreased from 22% to 7.3% (p = 0.003) [387]. Venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis may be implemented as part of an ERAS protocol. A single- centre non-randomised study showed a significant lower 30-day VTE incidence rate in patients treated for 28 days with enoxaparin compared to patients without prophylaxis [388]. Data from the Ontario Cancer Registry including 4,205 cystectomy patients of whom 1,084 received NAC showed that VTE rates are higher in patients treated with NAC as compared to patients treated with cystectomy only (12% vs. 8%, p = 0.002) [389]. 