7.3.3. Radical cystectomy: technique and extent. Different approaches have been described to improve voiding and sexual function in patients undergoing RC for BC. No consensus exists regarding which approach preserves function best. Concern remains regarding the impact of ‘sparing-techniques’ on oncological outcomes. 7.3.3.1. Radical cystectomy in men In men, standard RC includes removal of the bladder, prostate, seminal vesicles, distal ureters, and regional LNs. 7.3.3.1.1. Concomitant prostate cancer A systematic review and meta-analysis of 13,140 patients showed an incidental prostate cancer rate of 24% [330]. Incidental prostate cancer was associated with higher age and lower 5-year OS. However, the lower OS can be explained by the higher age of patients with incidental prostate cancer. Pathological reporting of the specimens should follow the recommendations as presented in the EAU-EANM-ESTRO-ESUR-ISUP-SIOG Guidelines on Prostate Cancer [331]. 7.3.3.1.2. Sexual-preserving techniques Four main types have been described: 1. Prostate sparing cystectomy: part of or the whole prostate is preserved including seminal vesicles, vas deferens and neurovascular bundles. 2. Capsule sparing cystectomy: the capsule or peripheral part of the prostate is preserved with adenoma (including prostatic urethra) removed by TURP or en bloc with the bladder. Seminal vesicles, vas deferens and neurovascular bundles are also preserved. 3. Seminal sparing cystectomy: seminal vesicles, vas deferens and neurovascular bundles are preserved. 4. Nerve-sparing cystectomy: the neurovascular bundles are the only tissue left in place. The systematic review on oncological and functional outcomes of sexual function-preserving cystectomy in men indentified 12 studies (n = 1,098) [332]. In the majority of cases, an open surgical approach was used and the urinary diversion of choice was an orthotopic neobladder. Median follow-up was longer than three years in nine studies, with three studies presenting results with a median follow-up longer than five years. The majority of the studies included patients who were potent pre-operatively with organ-confined disease without tumour in the bladder neck and/or prostatic urethra. Prostate cancer was ruled out in all of the sexual- preserving cystectomy (SPC) techniques, except in the nerve-sparing approach [331]. Oncological outcomes did not differ between groups in any of the comparative studies that measured local recurrence, metastatic recurrence, DSS and OS, at a median follow-up of three to five years. For techniques preserving prostatic tissue (prostate- or capsule-sparing), rates of incidental prostate cancer in the intervention group ranged from 0–15%. Incidental prostate cancer with ISUP grade ≥ 4 was not reported. Post-operative potency was significantly better in patients who underwent any type of SPC technique compared to conventional RC (p < 0.05), ranging from 80–90%, 50–100% and 29–78% for prostate-, capsule- or nerve-sparing techniques, respectively. Urinary continence, defined as the use of ‘no pads’ in the majority of studies, ranged from 88–100% (day-time continence) and from 31–96% (night-time continence) in the prostate-sparing cystectomy patients. No major differences were seen with regard to continence rates between any of these approaches. The evidence base suggest that these procedures may yield better sexual outcomes than standard RC without compromising oncological outcomes. However, the overall quality of the evidence was moderate, and hence if a SPC technique is offered, patients must be carefully selected, counselled and closely monitored. 7.3.3.1.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for sexual-preserving techniques in men Summary of evidenceLEThe majority of eligible patients motivated to preserve their sexual function will benefit from sexual-preserving techniques.2aNone of the sexual-preserving techniques (prostate/capsule/seminal/nerve-sparing) have shown to be superior, and no particular technique can be recommended.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingOnly offer sexual-preserving techniques to eligible men very motivated to preserve their sexual function.StrongSelect patients based on:organ-confined disease;absence of any kind of tumour at the level of the prostate, prostatic urethra or bladder neck.Strong 7.3.3.2. Radical cystectomy in women Historically, standard RC in women includes removal of the bladder, the entire urethra and adjacent vagina, uterus, distal ureters, and regional LNs. Pelvic floor disorders, sexual and voiding dysfunction in female patients are prevalent after RC [333]. As part of the pre-operative evaluation a gynaecological history should be obtained and patients should be counselled on the potential negative impact of RC on sexual function and/ or vaginal prolapse. Most importantly, a history of cervical cancer screening, abnormal vaginal bleeding and a family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer should be recorded, as well as ruling out possible pelvic organ prolapse. Post-operatively, screening for sexual and urinary function and prolapse, is mandatory. Pelvic organ-preserving techniques involve preserving the neurovascular bundle, vagina, uterus, ovaries or variations of any of the stated techniques. From an oncological point of view, concomitant malignancy in gynaecological organs is rare and local recurrences reported after RC are infrequent [334,335]. In premenopausal women, by preserving ovaries, hormonal homeostasis will be preserved, decreasing risk of cognitive impairment, cardiovascular diseases and loss of bone density. In case of an increased risk of hereditary breast or ovarian cancer (i.e., BRCA1/2 mutation carriers or patients with Lynch syndrome), salpingooophorectomy should be advised after childbearing and to all women over 40 years of age [336]. On the other hand, preservation of the uterus and vagina will provide the necessary support for the neobladder, thereby reducing the risk of urinary retention. It also helps to avoid post-operative prolapse as removal of the uterus predisposes to an anterior or posterior vaginal prolapse. In case of an already existing prolapse of the uterus, either isolated or combined with a vaginal prolapse, removing the uterus will be beneficial. It is noteworthy that by resecting the vaginal wall, the vagina shortens which could impair sexual satisfaction and function. Based on retrospective low quality data only, a systematic review evaluating the advantages and disadvantages of sexual-function preserving RC and orthotopic neobladder in female patients concluded that in well-selected patients, sparing female reproductive organs during RC appears to be oncologically safe and provides improved functional outcomes [337]. Historically, patients selection has been limited to cT2 disease, but there are recent encouraging reports that support including women with more advanced T-stage and histological subtypes without compromising oncological outcomes [338]. Nevertheless, a cross-sectional survey of more than 100 members of the US Society of Urologic Oncology identified significant gaps in adoption of sexual preserving techniques fo rwomen with organ-confined disease; however, in 80% a non-sexual preserving technique was still applied [339]. Pelvic organ-preserving RC could be considered also in elderly and fragile patients as it may be beneficial from the point of reduced blood loss and quicker bowel recovery [340]. Nevertheless, a cross-sectional study among more than 100 members of the Society of Urologic Oncology showed that in the US a non-sex-sparing technique is still used in 80% of cases [339]. 7.3.3.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for sexual-preserving techniques in women Summary of evidenceLEData regarding pelvic organ-preserving RC for female patients remain immature.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer sexual organ-preserving techniques to eligible women to preserve their sexual function.StrongSelect patients based on:absence of tumour in the area to be preserved to avoid positive soft tissue margins;absence of pT4 urothelial carcinoma.Strong 