7.3.4. Lymphadenectomy: role and extent. The optimal extent of lymphadectomy (LND) has not been established to date. Standard LND in MIBC patients involves removal of nodal tissue cranially up to the common iliac bifurcation, with the ureter being the medial border, and including the internal iliac, presacral, obturator fossa and external iliac nodes. The lateral borders are the genitofemoral nerves, caudally the circumflex iliac vein, the lacunar ligament and the LN of Cloquet [341]. Limited LND includes the nodes from the true pelvis, but excluding the deep obturator nodes. Extended LND includes the same boundaries as a standard LND, except for the cranial limit which is the region of the aortic bifurcation [342]. A super-extended LND extends cranially to the level of the inferior mesenteric artery [343]. Controversies in the clinical importance of LND are related to the question whether it should be considered a staging tool, a therapeutic procedure, or both. 7.3.4.1. Diagnostic value of lymphadenectomy To understand the lymphatic spread in MIBC, two important autopsy studies have been performed. The first study analysed 367 patients with a history of cystectomy or MIBC at the time of autopsy. In total, 215 patients (59%) had node-positive disease [344]. In these patients 92% of the positive LNs were regional (perivesical or pelvic), 72% retroperitoneal and 35% abdominal. The second autopsy study focused on the nodal yield when super-extended pelvic LND was performed. Substantial inter-individual differences were found with counts ranging from 10 to 53 nodes [345]. These findings demonstrate the limited utility of node count as a surrogate for extent of dissection, supporting a template-based LND instead. In addition to autopsy studies, several authors adressed the spread of lymphatic disease by performing LN mapping studies in MIBC patients undergoing RC and (super)extended PLND [346-348]. These studies have demonstrated that LN-positive disease is present in approximately 25% of patients. In the group of node- positive patients, positive LNs cranial to the iliac bifurcation were present in over 40% of patients, however, skip LN metastasis were very rare (1%), as seen in autopsy studies. From a staging perspective only, these studies suggest that a standard LND should be sufficient to identify nearly all patients with node-positive disease. 7.3.4.2. Therapeutic value of lymphadenectomy The therapeutic value of LND is a topic of continuous debate. To assess the oncological outcomes of different LND templates, a systematic review including 19 studies was performed [349]. Five studies compared LND vs. no LND and reported better oncological outcomes for the LND group. Seven out of twelve studies comparing (super)extended with limited or standard LND reported a beneficial outcome for (super)extended LND in at least a subset of patients. Two studies did not show a difference in outcome between extended and super-extended LND [349]. The two prospective randomised trials investigating the anatomic extend of the LND are the German LEA trial and the US/Canadien SWOG S1011 trial. In the LEA trial, patients with MIBC (n = 346) or T1G3 disease (n = 55) were included. Patients underwent either a limited LND (n= 203) or extended LND (n = 198). Survival differences between the groups were seen, in favour of extended LND. However, extended LND failed to show a significant advantage (the trial was designed to show an absolute improvement of 15% in 5-year RFS by extended LND) over limited LND for RFS, CSS, and OS. The results of the SWOG S1011 trial comparing standard versus extended LND, presented at the 2023 ASCO meeting, showed in patients with clinically localised bladder cancer after a median six years follow-up no DFS (HR 1.10 [95%CI 0.87-1.42] p=0.4) or OS (HR 1.15 [95%CI 0.89-1,48] p=0.29) benefit for an extended LND. It does, however, increase the risk of side effects and post-operative mortality. In conclusion, based on these two RCT’s, an extended LND, is not associated with improved survival and increases the risk of morbidity. 