7.3.5. Robotic-assisted laparoscopic cystectomy. A 2019 Cochrane SR of five RCTs compared robotic radical cystectomy (RARC) with extacorporeal urinary diversion and open radical cystectomy (ORC) [350]. One study included an laparoscopic radical cystectomy arm (LRC) [351]. No differences were found in complications, time to recurrence, QoL and surgical margin rate for RARC and ORC. RARC was associated with lower transfusion rate and shorter length of hospital stay (median 0.7 days). The study had very-low to moderate certainty of evidence. In 2023, an updated SR and meta-analysis was published including eight RCTs of which three studies performed intracorporeal urinary diversion [352]. The ERAS pathway was adopted in one study with extracorporeal urinary diversion and in three studies with intracorporeal urinary diversion [351,353-355]. The following outcomes were reported: Longer length of hospital stay for ORC (0.2 days); however, differences were seen depending on geographical location. In four USA and two UK trials longer hospital stay for ORC was reported (0.6 and 1.5 days, respectively) whilst in two EU based trials longer hospital stay for RARC was reported (0.9 days).Higher venous trombo-events (OR 1.8) and transfusion rates (0.5 blood units) for ORC.Longer operative time for RARC (mean difference: 76 min).No differences in 90-day complication rate and post-operative ileus rate.No differences in positive surgical margin rate.No differences in QoL except for the domain of phsyical functioning favouring RARC.No differences in OS and RFS (median follow-up time: 36 months). It should be noted that the meta-analysis did not distinguish between intracorporeal and extracorporeal approaches for urinary diversion in the RARC group. Long-term oncological outcomes were also reported in a large (n = 595) single-centre study with a median follow-up of over five years. In this study comparable recurrence and survival data, including atypical recurrences (defined as one or a combination of the following: portsite metastasis or peritoneal carcinomatosis) [356]. Interrestingly, another study detected residual cancer cells in pelvic washing specimens during or after, but not before, RARC in approximately half of the patients (9/17), which was associated with aggressive histological subtypes and cancer recurrence; however, these findings requirer confirmation in larger studies [357]. An economic evaluation (healthcare and societal perspective) of a Dutch prospective multi-centre comparative effectiveness study asessing ORC (n = 168) vs. RARC (n = 180) showed that both mean healthcare costs and societal costs per patient were significantly higher after RARC, resulting in an increase in QALYs of 0.02 [358]. Data on post-RC uretero-enteric stricture rates for both ORC and RARC remain inconclusive. Results are mainly reported by high-volume centres or derive from population-based studies with a large variety of endpoints and poor controlling of potential confounders, making comparison difficult [359-363]. Especially those managed by extracorporeal diversion (RARC-ECUD) tend to have more strictures compared to intracorporeal diversion (RARC-ICUD) [363]. This is explained by the need for more extensive dissection of ureter in RARC-ECUD, more tension, resulting in impaired blood supply [364,365]. 7.3.5.1. Summary of evidence and guidelines for robotic-assisted laparoscopic cystectomy Summary of evidenceLERobot-assisted radical cystectomy (RARC) and open radical cystectomy (ORC) provide similar 90-day complication rates, surgical margin rates, median-term oncological outcomes and quality of life outcome.1aOperative time is longer for RARC compared to ORC (1 to 1.5 hours), but with less blood loss and possibly shorter length of hospital stay compared to ORC.1aSurgeons experience and institutional volume are considered the key factor for outcome of both RARC and ORC, not the technique.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingInform the patient of the advantages and disadvantages of open radical cystectomy (ORC) and robot-assisted radical cystectomy (RARC) to allow selection of the proper procedure.StrongSelect experienced centres, not specific techniques, both for RARC and ORC.Strong 