3.10.4. Management. 3.10.4.1. Administration route of antibacterial therapy The choice between oral and parenteral therapy should be based on patient age; clinical suspicion of urosepsis; illness severity; refusal of fluids, food and/or oral medication; vomiting; diarrhoea; non-compliance; and complicated pyelonephritis (e.g. urinary obstruction). As a result of the increased incidence of urosepsis and severe pyelonephritis in newborns and infants aged less than two months, parenteral antibiotic therapy is recommended. Electrolyte disorders with life-threatening hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia based on pseudohypoaldosteronism can occur in these cases [517,518]. The choice of agent is also based on local antimicrobial sensitivity patterns, and should later be adjusted according to sensitivity-testing of the isolated uropathogen [481]. Not all available antibiotics are approved by national health authorities, especially in infancy. When recent urinary cultures are available use these sensitivity patterns in the choice for treatment. In children who require intravenuous treatment tobramycin or gentamicin is recommended if there is normal kidney function. When abnormal kidney function is suspected, ceftriaxon or cefotaxime are alternative treatment options. In children who can receive oral treatment without any known resistant urinary cultures, cefixime or amoxicillin-clavulanate are the empirical treatment options [519]. Some studies have demonstrated that once daily parenteral administration of gentamicin or ceftriaxone in a day treatment centre is safe, effective and cost-effective in children with UTI [520-522]. Delaying treatment in children with a febrile UTI for more than 48-72 hours increases the risk of renal scars [463,507]. 3.10.4.2. Duration of therapy Prompt adequate treatment of UTI can prevent the spread of infection and renal scarring. In newborns and young infants with a febrile UTI, up to 20% may have a positive blood culture [467,472]. Children with bacteremia did not show significant clinical differences with non-bacteremic infants, but did receive longer parental treatment [523]. In late infancy, there are no differences between strategies regarding the incidence of parenchymal scars, as diagnosed with DMSA scan [524]. Outcomes of short courses (one to three days) are inferior to seven to fourteen-day courses [481]. However, a simple cystitis can be treated with three to five days of antibiotics [519]. No significant difference in recurrent UTIs and rehospitalisation was found between seven day parental treatment and longer regimens for bacteremic UTI in younger infants [525]. In young infants a short course of parental treatment with early conversion to oral antibiotics may be considered. The use of exclusively oral therapy with a third-generation cephalosporin (e.g. cefixime or ceftibuten) has been demonstrated to be equivalent to the usual two to four days intravenous therapy followed by oral treatment [526-529]. Similar data have been shown for amoxicillin-clavulanate [530]. If ambulatory therapy is chosen, adequate surveillance, medical supervision and, if necessary, adjustment of therapy must be guaranteed. In the initial phase of therapy, a close ambulant contact to the family is advised [531]. In complicated UTI, uropathogens other than E. coli, such as Proteus mirabilis, Klebsiella spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, enterococci and staphylococci are more often the causative pathogens [472]. A temporary urinary diversion (transurethral catheter, suprapubic cystostomy, percutaneous nephrostomy or ureteral stenting) might be required in case of failure of conservative treatment in obstructive uropathy. Children with acute focal bacterial nephritis often present without pyyuria and significant bacteriuria. For the majority of children, the pathogenesis is related to ascending infection due to pre-existing uropathy, especially VUR or urinary obstruction. Initial management consists of broad-spectrum antibiotics with good tissue penetration. A treatment regimen of a total of three weeks with initial intravenous and subsequently oral therapy tailored to the pathogen identified in culture is recommended [532]. 3.10.4.3. Antimicrobial agents There is a great difference in the prevalence of antibiotic resistance of uropathogenic E. coli in different countries, with increased high resistance patterns in countries outside of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) [533]. There are upcoming reports of UTIs caused by extended spectrum ß-lactamase-producing enterobacteriaceae (ESBL) in children, with pooled numbers of UTI caused by ESBL producing bacteria of around 14% [534]. Within OECD countries the prevalence of resistance was 53% for ampicillin, 24% for trimethoprim, 8% for co-amoxiclav, 2% for ciproxin and 1% for nitrofurantoin [533]. Several risk factors and determinants for UTIs caused by ESBL and non-E. Coli bacteriae have been identified: history of infection, recent hospitalisation, short-term exposure to antiobiotics, and prophylaxis [533,535,536].Overall, oral nitrofurantoin seems to be a good empirical choice in the treatment of cystitis [537]. The choice of antibiotics should be guided by good antibiotic stewardship. It is important to be aware of the local resistance patterns. These are variable between countries and moreover between hospitals. Local antibiotic protocols and web-based recommendations can guide the choice for type of antibiotic therapy. The individual patient’s previous urine cultures should also be taken into account in this decision. The daily dosage of antibiotics is depended on the age, weight of the child as well as on renal and liver function. 3.10.4.4. Preventative measures Recurrent UTIs are problematic because the symptoms are bothersome to children and recurrent febrile UTIs will also result in renal scarring [465]. Therefore, it is important to prevent the incidence of recurrent UTIs. 3.10.4.4.1. Chemoprophylaxis Chemoprophylaxis is commonly used to prevent UTIs in children. However, with the increasing bacterial resistance numbers, it should be carefully considered which patients should receive antibacterial prophylaxis. The evidence for the use of antibacterial prophylaxis has been conflicting. Its use causes a reduction of the number of recurrent symptomatic UTIs, but long-term use of antibacterial prophylaxis has also been associated with increased microbial resistance [469,538]. Its use did not reduce newly acquired renal damage in children with first or second UTI [538]. However, when used in patients with anatomic abnormalities of the urinary system a reduction in UTIs and subsequent renal scarring was shown [469,538]. In children with BBD and VUR, a benefit was seen in the reduction of recurrent UTI with the use of antomicrobial prophylaxis [539,540] (see also Chapter 3.15 on VUR). For the specific group of patients with incomplete bladder emptying with properly performed clean intermittent catheterisation but still suffering from recurrent UTIs the intravesical application of gentamycin has proven to be effective [541]. Table 1: Drugs for antibacterial prophylaxis* SubstanceProphylactic dosage(mg/kg bw/d)Limitations in neonates and infantsTrimethoprim**2Not recommended under 6 weeks of ageTrimethoprimSulfamethoxazole1-210-15Not recommended under two months of ageSulfamethoxazole1-2Until three months of ageNitrofurantoin**1-2Not recommended under two months of ageCefaclor10No age limitationsCefixim2Preterms and newborns * Reproduced with permission from the International Consultation on Urological Diseases (ICUD), International Consultation on Urogenital Infections, 2009. Copyright© by the European Association of Urology [542]** Substances of first choice are nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim. In exceptional cases, oral cephalosporin can be used. 3.10.4.4.2. Dietary supplements Cranberry, mostly as juice, has been shown to prevent UTIs in healthy children, while in children with urogenital abnormalities, cranberries appear to be just as effective as antibiotic prophylaxis [543]. The results for probiotics are somewhat more conflicting, with one systematic review not ruling out any effect [335] and a RCT showing promising results in children with normal urogenital anatomy [544]. A meta-analysis could not demonstrate a beneficial effect, only as an adjuvant to antibiotic prophylaxis [545]. Other supplements of interest were Vitamin A, which showed promising results in preventing renal scarring in children with acute pyelonephritis [546,547]. The use of Vitamin E could possibly improve the symptoms of UTI [548]. More studies into these supplements are warranted. 3.10.4.4.3. Preputium A risk reduction of recurrent UTI regarding the preputium has been shown in two studies. When a physiologic phimosis is present in boys with a UTI the use of steroid cream significantly reduced recurrent UTIs [41]. In boys with recurrent UTIs and hydronephrosis present, ten boys would need to be circumcised to prevent one UTI [39]. 3.10.4.4.4. Bladder and bowel dysfunction Bladder and bowel dysfunction is a risk factor for which each child with UTI should be screened upon presentation [460]. Normalisation of micturition disorders or bladder overactivity is important to lower the rate of UTI recurrence. If there are signs of BBD at infection-free intervals, further diagnosis and effective treatment are strongly recommended [540]. Treatment of constipation leads to a decrease in UTI recurrence and a multidisciplinary approach is recommended [460,539,540]. Therefore, exclusion of BBD is strongly recommended in any toilet-trained child with febrile and/or recurrent UTI, and it should be treated (For treatment see chapter 3.11 on LUTS). 3.10.4.5. Monitoring of UTI With successful treatment, urine usually becomes sterile after 24 hours, and leukocyturia normally disappears within three to four days. Normalisation of body temperature can be expected within 24-48 hours after the start of therapy in 90% of cases. In patients with prolonged fever and failing recovery, treatment-resistant uropathogens or the presence of congenital uropathy or acute urinary obstruction should be considered. Repeated US examination is recommended in these cases. Procalcitonin (among other laboratory inflammatory parameters such as C-reactive protein and leukocyte count) can be used as reliable serum marker for early prediction of renal parenchymal inflammation [549]. A cut-off value of serum procalcitonin of 1.0 ng/mL has been shown to be predictive of acute pyelonephritis in young children [550]. In patients with febrile UTI, serum electrolytes and blood cell counts should be followed up. 