3.10.2. Classification systems. There are five widely used classification systems according to; site, severity, episode, symptoms and complicating factors. For acute treatment, site and severity are most important. 3.10.2.1. Classification according to site Lower urinary tract infection (cystitis) is an inflammatory condition of the urinary bladder mucosa with general signs and symptoms including infection, dysuria, frequency, urgency, malodorous urine, enuresis, haematuria, and suprapubic pain. Upper urinary tract infection (pyelonephritis) is a diffuse pyogenic infection of the renal pelvis and parenchyma. The onset of pyelonephritis is generally abrupt. Clinical signs and symptoms include fever (> 38°C), chills, costovertebral angle or flank pain, and tenderness. 3.10.2.2. Classification according to severity In a lower UTI, children may have only mild pyrexia; are able to take fluids and oral medication; are only slightly or not dehydrated; and have a good expected level of compliance. When a low level of compliance is expected, such children should be managed as those with severe UTI. In severe UTI, infection is related to the presence of fever of > 39°C, the feeling of being ill, persistent vomiting, and moderate or severe dehydration. Most severe UTIs are upper urinary tract infections. 3.10.2.3. Classification according to episode first/persistent/recurrent/breakthrough The first UTI may be a sign of anatomical anomalies. Anatomical evaluation is recommended (see below). Recurrent infection can be divided into unresolved and persistent infection. In unresolved infection, initial therapy is inadequate for elimination of bacterial growth in the urinary tract (inadequate therapy, inadequate antimicrobial urinary concentration [poor renal concentration/ gastrointestinal malabsorption], and infection involving multiple organisms with differing antimicrobial susceptibilities). Persistent infection is caused by re-emergence of bacteria from a site within the urinary tract coming from a nidus for persistent infection that cannot be eradicated (e.g. infected stones, non-functioning or poorly functioning kidneys/renal segments, ureteral stumps after nephrectomy, necrotic papillae, urachal cyst, urethral diverticulum, peri-urethral gland, vesicointestinal, rectourethral or vesicovaginal fistulas). The same pathogen is identified in recurrent infections, but episodes of sterile urine may occur during and shortly following antimicrobial treatment. A breakthough infection in patients under antibacterial prophylaxis is usually caused by resistent bacteria, parental non-compliance and/or severe urogenital anomalies [469,470]. In re-infection, each episode can be caused by a variety of new infecting organisms, in contrast to bacterial persistence in which the same infecting organism is always isolated. However, the most common general pathogenic species is E. coli, which occurs in many different serotypes. Therefore, recurrent E. coli UTI does not equate to infection with the same organism. 3.10.2.4. Classification according to symptoms Children may have typical or atypical symptoms regarding a UTI. In neonates and infants the most commen symptoms are fever, vomiting, lethargy and/or irritability. Infants and children may have non-specific signs such as poor appetite, failure to thrive, lethargy, irritability, vomiting or diarrhoea. Toilet trained children may report cystitis symptoms along with fever/flank pain. Asymptomatic bacteriuria indicates attenuation of uropathogenic bacteria by the host, or colonisation of the bladder by non-virulent bacteria that are incapable of activating a symptomatic response (no leukocyturia, no symptoms). Asymptomatic UTI includes leukocyturia but no other symptoms. Symptomatic UTI, includes irritative voiding symptoms, suprapubic pain (cystitis), fever and malaise (pyelonephritis). Cystitis may represent early recognition of an infection destined to become pyelonephritis, or bacterial growth controlled by a balance of virulence and host response. 3.10.2.5. Classification according to complicating factors In uncomplicated UTI, infection occurs in a patient with a morphologically and functionally normal upper and lower urinary tract, normal renal function and competent immune system. This category includes mostly isolated or recurrent bacterial cystitis and is usually associated with a narrow spectrum of infecting pathogens that are easily eradicated by a short course of oral antimicrobial agents. Patients can be managed on an outpatient basis, with an emphasis on documenting resolution of bacteriuria, followed by elective evaluation for potential anatomical or functional abnormalities of the urinary tract [471]. A complicated UTI occurs in children with known mechanical or functional pathology of the urinary tract. Mechanical obstruction is commonly due to the presence of posterior urethral valves, strictures or stones, independent of their location. Functional obstruction often results from lower urinary tract dysfunction (LUTD) of either neurogenic or non-neurogenic origin and dilating VUR. Patients with complicated UTI require hospitalisation and parenteral antibiotics. Prompt anatomical evaluation of the urinary tract is critical to exclude the presence of significant abnormalities [472]. If mechanical or functional abnormalities are present, adequate drainage of the infected urinary tract is necessary. 