7.5.4. Trimodality bladder-preserving treatment. Bladder preservation as an alternative to RC is generally reserved for patients with smaller solitary tumours, no extensive or multifocal CIS, no tumour-related hydronephrosis, and good pre-treatment bladder function. Trimodality bladder-preserving treatment should also be considered in all patients with a contraindication for surgery, either a relative or absolute contraindication since the factors that determine fitness for surgery and chemoradiotherapy differ. Trimodality therapy combines TURB, chemotherapy and RT. The rationale to combine TURB with RT is to achieve maximal local tumour control in the bladder and adjacent nodes. The addition of radiosensitising chemotherapy or other radiosensitisers (mentioned below) is aimed at the potentiation of RT. Micrometastases are targeted by platinum-based combination chemotherapy (for details see Section 7.1). The aim of TMT is to preserve the bladder and QoL without compromising oncological outcome. There are no definitive contemporary data supporting the benefit of using neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy combined with chemoradiation. Patient selection is critical in achieving good outcomes [439]. Whether a node dissection should be performed before TMT as in RC remains unclear [81,82]. In the case of TMT, two distinct patterns of care emerge; treatment aimed at patients fit for cystectomy who elect TMT or refuse cystectomy, and treatment aimed at older, less fit, patients. For the former category, TMT presents selective bladder preservation and in this case the initial step is a radical TURB where as much tumour as possible should be resected. In this case appropriate patient selection (e.g., T2 tumours, no CIS) is crucial [440,441]. Even in case of an initial presumed complete resection, a second TUR has been suggested to reveal tumour in > 50% of patients and subsequently improves 5-year OS in case of TMT [442]. For patients who are not candidates for cystectomy, less stringent criteria can be applied, but extensive CIS and poor bladder function should both be regarded as relative contraindications. A collaborative review has described the principles of TMT [439]. For radiation, two schedules are most commonly used; historically within the RTOG a split-course format with interval cystoscopy [443] and single- phase treatment which is now more commonly used [444]. A conventional radiation schedule includes EBRT to the bladder and limited pelvic LNs with an initial dose of 40-45 Gy, with a boost to the whole bladder of 50–54 Gy and a further tumour boost to a total dose of 60–66 Gy. If not boosting the tumour, it is also reasonable for the whole bladder to be treated to 59.4–66 Gy. For node-positive disease, consider boosting grossly involved nodes to the highest achievable dose that does not violate normal tissue constraints. Therefore, elective treatment to the LNs (when node negative) is optional and should take into account patient comorbidities and the risks of toxicity to adjacent critical structures. A reasonable radiation dosing alternative to conventional fractionation when treating the bladder-only fields is moderately hypofractionated EBRT to 55 Gy in 20 fractions which has been suggested to be non-inferior to 64 Gy in 32 fractions in terms of invasive loco-regional control, OS and late toxicity [421,445] in a meta-analysis of individual patient data from the BC2001 and BCON studies. Different concurrent chemotherapy regimens have been used, but most evidence exists for cisplatin [446] and mitomycin-C plus 5-FU [444]. Alternative regimens that have been evaluated include: single agent gemcitabine [447], capecitabine [448] and hypoxia modification with carbogen/nicotinamide [81,82]. In a recently published phase II RCT, twice-a-day radiation plus 5-FU/cisplatin was compared to once-daily radiation plus gemcitabine [447]. Both arms were found to result in a > 75% free from distant metastases rates at 3 years (78% and 84%, respectively). Therefore, there are good chemotherapy options for non-cisplatin candidates such as 5-FU/mitomycin-C or low-dose gemcitabine. Five-year CSS and OS rates vary between 50%–84% and 36%–74%, respectively, with salvage cystectomy rates of 10–30% [439,440,444,446,449]. There are no successfully completed RCTs comparing the outcome of TMT with RC. The BC2001 trial with 10 year follow-up showed that combined radiotherapy with mitomycin C and fluorouracil significantly improved locoregional control and five year cystectomy rates and non-significantly improved DFS, OS and DSS compared to radiotherapy alone [450] as shown in other studies [443,444,451]. Many of the reported series have differing characteristics as compared to the larger surgical series, which typically have median ages in the mid- to-late 60s compared to mid-70s for some large RT series (reviewed by James, et al. [444]). As there are no completed randomised trials, RC and TMT have been compared in systematic reviews, meta-analyses, large population-based studies and multi-institutional propensity score matched and weighted analyses [328,408,452]. Overall, in balance, these studies show similar oncological outcomes between radical cystectomy and trimodality therapy for select patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer. These results support that trimodality therapy, in the setting of multidisciplinary shared decision making, should be offered to all suitable candidates with muscle-invasive bladder cancer and not only to patients with significant comorbidities for whom surgery is not an option [328]. Another study reported no difference in survival outcomes in cN+ patients treated with surgery versus radical RT [453]. The Boston group has also reported on their experience in 66 patients with mixed histological subtypes treated with TMT and found similar complete response, OS, DSS and salvage cystectomy rates as in UC [454]. The majority of recurrences post-TMT are non-invasive and can be managed conservatively [444]. In contemporary series, salvage cystectomy is required in about 10–15% of patients treated with TMT and can be curative [328,440,444,449]. Current data suggest that major late complication rates are slightly higher but remain acceptable for salvage- vs. primary cystectomy [455]. A sub-analysis of two RTOG trials looked at complete response (T0) and near-complete response (Ta or Tis) after TMT [456]. After a median follow-up of 5.9 years 41/119 (35%) of patients experienced a bladder recurrence, and fourteen required salvage cystectomy. There was no difference between complete and near- complete responders. Non-muscle-invasive BC recurrences after complete response to TMT were reported in 25% of patients by the Boston group, sometimes over a decade after initial treatment [457]. A NMIBC recurrence was associated with a lower DSS, although in properly selected patients, intravesical BCG could avoid immediate salvage cystectomy. Overall significant late pelvic (GI/genitourinary [GU]) toxicity rates after TMT are low and QoL is good [444,458,459]. A combined analysis of survivors from four RTOG trials with a median follow-up of 5.4 years showed that combined-modality therapy was associated with low rates of late grade 3 toxicity (5.7% GU and 1.9% GI). No late grade 4 toxicities or treatment-related deaths were recorded [458]. A retrospective study showed QoL to be good after TMT and in most domains better than after cystectomy, although prospective validations are needed [460]. One option to reduce side effects after TMT is the use of IMRT and image-guided RT (IGRT) [81,82,461]. A bladder-preserving TMT strategy requires very close multidisciplinary cooperation [81,82]. This was also highlighted by a Canadian group [462]. In Ontario between 1994 and 2008 only 10% (370/3,759) of patients with cystectomy had a pre-operative radiation oncology consultation, with high geographical variations. Independent factors associated with this consultation included advanced age (p < 0.001), greater comorbidity (p < 0.001) and earlier year of diagnosis (p < 0.001). A bladder-preserving TMT strategy also requires a high level of patient compliance. Even if a patient has shown a clinical response to a TMT bladder-preserving strategy, the bladder remains a potential source of recurrence, hence long-term life-long bladder monitoring is essential and patients should be counselled that this will be required. 7.5.4.1. Summary of evidence and recommednations for trimodality bladder-preserving treatment Summary of evidenceLELong-term survival rates of TMT bladder-preserving treatment are comparable to those of early cystectomy . The contraindications for TMT or surgery have to be considered.2Combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy is more effective than radiotherapy alone in bladder sparing treatment.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer surgical intervention or trimodality bladder-preserving treatments (TMT) to appropriate candidates as primary curative therapeutic approaches since they are more effective than radiotherapy alone.StrongAdvise patients who are candidates for TMT in a mutlidisciplinary setting including urologists, medical oncologists and radiation oncologists concerning the benfits and harms of TMT.StrongOffer TMT as an alternative to selected, well-informed and compliant patients, especially for whom radical cystectomy is not an option or not acceptable.StrongAdvise patients who are candidates for TMT that life-long bladder monitoring is essential.Strong 7.5.4.2. EAU-ESMO consensus statements on the management of advanced- and variant bladder cancer  [81,82]* Consensus statementCandidates for curative treatment, such as cystectomy or bladder preservation, should be clinically assessed by at least an oncologist, a urologist, a radiation oncologist (in case adjuvant radiotherapy or bladder preservation is considered) and a neutral HCP such as a specialist nurse.An important determinant for patient eligibility in case of bladder-preserving treatment is absence of carcinoma in situ.An important determinant for patient eligibility in case of bladder-preserving treatment is absence or presence of hydronephrosis.When assessing patient eligibility for bladder preservation, the likelihood of successful debulking surgery should be taken into consideration (optimal debulking).In case of bladder preservation with radiotherapy, combination with a radiosensitiser is always recommended to improve clinical outcomes, such as cisplatin, 5-FU/MMC, carbogen/nicotinamide or gemcitabine.Radiotherapy for bladder preservation should be performed with IMRT and IGRT to reduce side effects.Dose escalation above standard radical doses to the primary site in case of bladder preservation, either by IMRT or by brachytherapy, is not recommended. *Only statements which met the a priori consensus threshold across all three stakeholder groups are listed (defined as > 70% agreement and < 15% disagreement, or vice versa).HCP = healthcare professional; IGRT = image-guided radiotherapy; IMRT = intensity-modulated radiotherapy;5FU = 5-fluorouracil; MMC = mitomycin-C. 