7.5.2. External beam radiotherapy. Current RT techniques with soft-tissue matching and image guidance result in superior bladder coverage and a reduced integral dose to the surrounding tissues. The target total dose (to bladder and/or bladder tumour) for curative EBRT in BC is 64–66 Gy [421,422]. A reasonable alternative is moderately hypofractionated EBRT to 55 Gy in 20 fractions which has been suggested to be non-inferior to 64 Gy in 32 fractions in terms of invasive locoregional control, OS, and late toxicity. In a phase II study, 55 patients (median age 86) with BC, unfit for cystectomy or even daily RT, were treated with 6-weekly doses of 6 Gy [423]. Forty-eight patients completed EBRT with acceptable toxicity and 17% showed local progression after two years demonstrating good local control with this more ultra-hypofractionated schedule. Elective treatment to the LNs is optional and should take into account patient comorbidities and the risks of toxicity to adjacent critical structures. For node-positive disease, consider boosting grossly involved nodes to the highest achievable dose that does not violate normal tissue constraints based on the clinical scenario. The use of modern standard EBRT techniques results in major related late morbidity of the urinary bladder or bowel in less than 5% of patients [424]. Acute diarrhoea is reduced even more with intensity- modulated RT [425]. Important prognostic factors for outcome include response to EBRT, tumour size, hydronephrosis, presence of CIS, and completeness of the initial TURB. Additional prognostic factors reported are age and stage [426]. With the use of modern EBRT techniques, efficacy and safety results seem to have improved over time. A 2002 Cochrane analysis demonstrated that RC has an OS benefit compared to RT [427], although this was not the case in a 2014 retrospective review using a propensity score analysis [428]. In a 2017 retrospective cohort study of U.S. National Cancer Database data, patients over 80 were identified with cT2–4, N0–3, M0 BC, who were treated with curative EBRT (60–70 Gy, n = 739) or concurrent chemoradiotherapy (n = 630) between 2004 and 2013 [429]. The 2-year OS was 42% for EBRT vs. 56% for chemoradiotherapy (p < 0.001). For EBRT a higher RT dose and a low stage were associated with improved OS. In conclusion, although EBRT results seem to improve over time, EBRT alone does not seem to be as effective as surgery or TMT therapy (see Section 7.5.4). Factors that influence outcome should be considered. However, EBRT can be an alternative treatment in patients unfit for radical surgery or concurrent chemotherapy, and it can also be effective in helping control bleeding. The results of several studies show that radiotherapy delivered in a hypofractionated regime (such as 21 Gy in 3 fractions evaluated in the MRC BA09 randomised control trial [430], can provide rapid relief of local bladder cancer symptoms, including in particular symptomatic hematuria. Other fractionation regimes include 35 Gy in 10 fractions, 30 Gy in 5 fractions, 36 Gy in 6 fractions given once weekly [431], and even a single 8 Gy fraction. In the palliative setting, symptom resolution typically lasts for the majority of the patients’ remaining lifespan. 7.5.2.1. Summary of evidence and guideline for external beam radiotherapy Summary of evidenceLEExternal beam RT alone should only be considered as a therapeutic option when the patient is unfit for cystectomy or chemoradiation.3Radiotherapy can also be used to stop bleeding from the tumour when local control cannot be achieved by transurethral manipulation.1b RecommendationStrength ratingDo not offer radiotherapy alone as primary therapy for localised bladder cancer.Strong 7.5.2.2. EAU-ESMO consensus statements on the management of advanced and variant bladder cancer [81,82]* Consensus statementRadiotherapy alone (single block) is not the preferred radiotherapeutic schedule.Radiotherapy for bladder preservation should be performed with IMRT and IGRT to reduce side effects.Dose escalation above standard radical doses to the primary site in case of bladder preservation, either by IMRT or brachytherapy, is not recommended. *Only statements which met the a priori consensus threshold across all three stakeholder groups are listed (defined as ≥ 70% agreement and ≤ 15% disagreement, or vice versa).IGRT = image-guided radiotherapy; IMRT = intensity-modulated radiotherapy. 