4.2.4.3.2.2. Autologous sling. In the past, autologous, cadaveric, xenograft, and synthetic materials have been used for bladder neck pubovaginal sling. Nowadays, use of autologous tissue, either rectus sheath or fascia lata, is the most studied material with the strongest evidence base to support its use [367]. The ESTER SR included three trials of autologous sling vs. open colposuspension, six trials of autologous sling vs. retropubic MUS and one trial of autologous sling vs. transobturator MUS. The quality of evidence was overall very low. The pooled estimate showed that fascial sling had a higher cure rate at one year than open colposuspension (OR: 1.24), retropubic MUS (OR: 1.06) and transobturator MUS (OR: 1.44) but without significance. The SUCRA score was 89.4% for women cured after autologous fascial sling. A sub-analysis from a Cochrane review showed autologous slings had better effectiveness compared to colposuspension at one to five years’ follow-up [364]. In an RCT of Burch colposuspension vs. autologous slings, complete continence rates decreased substantially over time in both arms. At five years, the continence rate of colposuspension was 24.1% compared to 30.8% for fascial slings. Satisfaction remained higher in the sling group (83% vs. 73%) and was directly related to continencestatus [368]. Complications Adverse events rates were similar for the two treatment groups (Burch 10% and sling 9%) although postoperative obstruction was found exclusively in the sling group. Voiding difficulties appear to be more common after autologous sling (15.4% vs. 10.2%; OR: 1.46) than after retropubic MUS. Compared with open colposuspension, the rate of bladder or urethral perforation was lower for traditional sling (0.6% vs. 3.0%; OR:0.20) [359]. 4.2.4.3.2.2.1.Summary of evidence and recommendation for autologous sling Summary of evidenceLEHigh cure rates are associated with autologous sling placement for treatment of SUI.1aAutologous sling is more effective in terms of cure rate than colposuspension.1aAutologous sling has a similar rate of adverse events compared to open colposuspension, with higher rates of voiding dysfunction and postoperative UTI, but lower rates of POP and bladder or urethral perforation.1a RecommendationStrength ratingOffer autologous sling placement to women seeking surgical treatment for stress urinary incontinence following a thorough discussion of the risks and benefits relative to other surgical modalities.Strong 