e.StrongInform women of the complications associated with MUS procedures and discuss all alternative treatments in the light of recent publicity surrounding surgical mesh.StrongInform women who are being offered single-incision slings (Ajust® and Altis®), that short term efficacy appears equivalent compared to conventional MUS.StrongInform women who are being offered a single-incision sling that long-term efficacy remains uncertain.Strong Intravesical balloon treatment has been explored for women with SUI. The Vesair® gas-filled intravesical balloon differs from other treatment methods in that it is not intended to increase outlet resistance or minimise urethral hypermobility but to attenuate the fluctuation of intravesical pressure when the abdominal pressure increases [405,406]. Two sham controlled RCTs have evaluated the Vesair® intravesical balloon [405,407]. Both reported significant reductions in incontinence symptoms and pad weight, but QoL was not significantly different between study arms. High levels of adverse events were reported in both trials as well as significant numbers of withdrawals/device removals. The most common adverse events were dysuria, urgency, gross haematuria and UTIs. Mechanical devices have been used to treat SUI for centuries. There are several devices available which act either by supporting the bladder neck or urethra to address urethral hypermobility, or by occluding the urethral lumen. A Cochrane review of eight RCTs that included three small trials comparing mechanical devices to no treatment found inconclusive evidence of benefit [408]. Another SR of mechanical devices concluded that there was insufficient evidence to support their use in women [409]. The place of mechanical devices in the management of SUI remains in question. Currently, there is little evidence from controlled trials on which to judge whether their use is better than no treatment, and large well-conducted trials are required for clarification. There is also insufficient evidence in favour of one particular device and few comparisons of mechanical devices with other forms of treatment [408]. Systematic reviews support the use of compression devices such as the adjustable compression therapy and artificial urinary sphincter (AUS) devices [410,411]. Although these procedures are largely reserved for those with recurrent or complicated SUI (see Section 4.2.4.3.3.3 External compression devices), these recent additions to the literature include the use of some compression devices for uncomplicated SUI. 4.2.4.3.2.6.1.Summary of evidence and recommendations for other treatments for uncomplicated stress urinary incontinence Summary of evidenceLEImplantation of an artificial sphincter can improve or cure incontinence in women with uncomplicated SUI.3Implantation of the adjustable compression therapy (ACT®) device may improve uncomplicated SUI.3Complications, mechanical failure and device explantation often occur with both the artificial sphincter and ACT©.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer mechanical devices to women with mild-to-moderate SUI who fail conservative treatment only as part of a well-conducted research trial.StrongInform women receiving artificial urinary sphincter or adjustable compression device (ACT®) that, although cure is possible, even in expert centres there is a high risk of complications, mechanical failure, or a need for explantation.Strong This section addresses surgical treatment for women with complicated SUI as defined in Section 4.2.2. Women with associated genitourinary prolapse are included in Section 4.7. The principal procedures included are: Colposuspension or MUS (synthetic or autologous) following failed primary SUI surgery;External compression devices: adjustable compression therapy (ACT®) and AUS;Adjustable slings. Urinary incontinence following SUI surgery may indicate persistent or recurrent SUI, or the development of de novo UUI, or both. Careful evaluation including urodynamics is an essential part of the work-up of these patients. Most of the data on surgery for SUI refer to primary operations. Even when secondary procedures have been included, it is unusual for the outcomes in this subgroup to be separately reported. When they are, the numbers of patients are usually too small to allow meaningful comparisons. This means that no firm recommendations can be made regarding which modality is best for the treatment of recurrent SUI, and previous SRs have commented that in view of the absence of any evidence, clinicians must rely largely on expert opinion or personal experience when advising patients about treatment options [412]. The ESTER network meta-analysis revealed that women with transobturator MUS were more likely to undergo repeat surgery than those who had retropubic MUS, and fewer repeat operations were observed after retropubic MUS compared with other interventions [359]. A recent update of two Urinary Incontinence Treatment Network trials [413] compared the retreatment-free survival rates by initial surgical procedure. Five-year retreatment-free survival rates were 87%, 96%, 97%, and 99% for Burch colposuspension, autologous fascial sling, transobturator, and retropubic MUS, respectively. Types of surgical retreatment included autologous fascial sling (19), bulking agent (18), and synthetic sling (1). This suggests that MUS may not be preferred in cases of recurrent SUI [413]. In these cohorts, 6% of women after standard anti-incontinence procedures were retreated within five years, mostly with injection therapy or autologous fascial sling. Not all women with recurrent SUI chose surgical retreatment. A Cochrane review attempted to summarise the data regarding different types of MUS procedures for recurrent SUI after failure of primary surgical therapy [414]. The literature search identified 58 records, but all were excluded from quantitative analysis because they did not meet eligibility criteria. Overall, there were no data to recommend or refute any of the different management strategies for recurrent or persistent SUI after failed MUS surgery. Another SR looking at the effectiveness of MUS in recurrent SUI included twelve studies and reported an overall subjective cure rate following MUS for recurrent SUI after any previous surgery of 78.5% at an average 29 months’ follow-up [415]. The subjective cure rate following MUS after previous failed MUS was 73.3% at follow-up of sixteen months. The authors commented that there was a lower cure rate with transobturator compared to the retropubic tape for recurrent SUI after previous surgery. Conflicting evidence comes from a SR assessing the effectiveness and complications of various surgical procedures for female recurrent SUI and reported on data from 350 women in ten RCTs with a mean follow-up of 18.1 months [416]. The authors found no difference in patient-reported and objective cure/improvement rates between retropubic and transobturator MUS in the setting of recurrent SUI. There was also no significant difference between Burch colposuspension and retropubic MUS in terms of patient-reported improvement or objective cure/improvement. A SR of older trials of open surgery for SUI suggested that the longer-term outcomes of repeat open Burch colposuspension may be poor compared to autologous fascial slings [417]. Similarly, one large non-randomised comparative series suggested that cure rates after more than two previous operations were 0% for open Burch colposuspension and 38% for autologous fascial sling [418]. 4.2.4.3.3.1.1.Summary of evidence for surgery in those with recurrent stress urinary incontinence following failed primary surgery Summary of evidenceLEFailure rates of single-incision slings appear higher than with other types of MUS.1aThe incidence of repeat surgery is higher in those women who underwent primary transobturator compared to retropubic MUS.1aThe five-year failure rate of Burch colposuspension appears higher than for synthetic or traditional sling procedures.2bSome studies suggest that retropubic synthetic MUS procedures appear to be more effective than transobturator MUS for the treatment of recurrent SUI, but this is not a consistent finding in the literature.1aMost procedures are less effective when used as second-line procedures.2aBurch colposuspension has similar short-term patient-reported or objective cure rates when compared to TVT for treatment of recurrent SUI.1bAutologous sling appears superior to Burch colposuspension for treatment of recurrent SUI.2b Although adjustable slings are most commonly used for treatment of complicated SUI, they may also be considered for uncomplicated SUI. There are no RCTs investigating outcome of adjustable sling insertion for women with SUI. There are limited data from cohort studies on adjustable tension slings with variable selection criteria and outcome definitions. Few studies have included sufficient numbers o