f patients or have long enough follow-up to provide useful evidence. One adjustable sling is the Remeex system (Neomedic International®, Terrassa, Spain), which was investigated in a prospective study of 230 women with SUI [419]. After a mean follow-up of 89 months, 165 patients were cured of SUI (71.7% in the intention-to-treat [ITT] analysis, 80.5% in per protocol [PP] analysis). Forty patients remained incontinent (17.4% in ITT, 19.5% in PP) and 88 patients required readjustment of the sling during follow-up. The tension was increased in 82 cases due to recurrence of SUI and reduced in six due to outlet obstruction. The currently available adjustable sling devices have differing designs, making it difficult to draw general conclusions about them as a class of procedure. 4.2.4.3.3.2.1.Summary of evidence for adjustable slings Summary of evidenceLEThere is only low-level evidence to suggest that adjustable MUS devices may be effective for cure or improvement of SUI in women.3There is no evidence that adjustable slings are superior to standard MUS.4 External compression devices are usually used for treatment of recurrent SUI after failure of previous surgery but can be considered for primary treatment. Studies have largely included patients with profound intrinsic failure of the sphincter mechanism, characterised by low VLPP or urethral closure pressure [410,411]. The two intracorporeal external urethral compression devices available are the adjustable compression therapy (ACT®) device and AUS. ACT®: Using US or fluoroscopic guidance, the ACT® device is inserted by placement of two inflatable spherical balloons; one on either side of the bladder neck. The volume of each balloon can be adjusted through a subcutaneous port placed within the labia majora. A SR including eight studies published between 2007 and 2013 with follow-up of one to six years revealed 15–44% of patients considered that their SUI had been cured and 66–78.4% were satisfied [410]. The explantation rate was 19–31%. In these studies, a significant reduction in the number of pads used daily was consistently observed after ACT® balloon placement and QoL was significantly improved. The authors concluded that ACT® balloons constitute a reasonable, minimally-invasive alternative for treatment of female SUI due to intrinsic sphincter deficiency, especially in patients who have already experienced failure of standard surgical treatment. AUS: The major advantage of AUS over other anti-incontinence procedures is the perceived ability to be able to void normally [408]. There have been a few case series of AUS in women, with populations of 45–215 patients and follow-up of one month to 25 years [420-423]. Case series have been confounded by varying selection criteria, especially the proportion of women who have neurological dysfunction or who have had previous surgery. Most patients achieved an improvement in SUI, with reported subjective cure in 59–88%. Common adverse effects included mechanical failure requiring revision (< 42% at ten years) and explantation (5.9–15%). In a retrospective series of 215 women followed-up for a mean six years, the risk factors for failure were older age, previous Burch colposuspension and pelvic radiotherapy [423]. Early reports of laparoscopically implanted AUS do not have sufficient patient populations or sufficient follow-up to be able to draw any conclusions [424,425]. A more recent SR included seventeen studies, but all were retrospective or prospective non-comparative case series [411]. Most patients had undergone at least one anti-incontinence surgical procedure prior to AUS implantation (69.1–100%). Outcomes revealed that complete continence rates were 61–100%. The rates of explantation were 0–45%, erosion rates were 0–22% and mechanical failure rates were 0–44%. The authors concluded that AUS can provide excellent functional outcomes in women with SUI resulting from intrinsic urethral sphincter deficiency but at the cost of high morbidity. 4.2.4.3.3.3.1.Summary of evidence for external compression devices Summary of evidenceLEImplantation of an artificial sphincter improves or cures incontinence in women with SUI caused by sphincter insufficiency.3Implantation of the AUS device may improve complicated SUI.3Implantation of the ACT® device may improve complicated SUI.3Complications, mechanical failure, and device explantation often occur with both the artificial sphincter and ACT®.3Explantation of AUS is more frequent in older women and among those who have had previous Burch colposuspension or pelvic radiotherapy.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingManagement of complicated stress urinary incontinence (SUI) should only be offered in centres with appropriate experience (see Section: 4.2.4.3.1).StrongBase the choice of surgery for recurrent SUI on careful evaluation, including individual patient factors and considering further investigations such as cystoscopy, multichannel urodynamics, as appropriate.StrongInform women with recurrent SUI that the outcome of a surgical procedure, when used as second-line treatment, is generally inferior to its use as first-line treatment, both in terms of reduced efficacy and increased risk of complications.WeakOnly offer adjustable mid-urethral sling as primary surgical treatment for SUI as part of a structured research programme.StrongConsider secondary synthetic sling, bulking agents, Burch colposuspension, autologous sling or artificial urinary sphincter (AUS) as options for women with complicated SUI.WeakInform women receiving AUS or ACT® device that, although cure is possible, even in expert centres, there is a high risk of complications, mechanical failure, or a need for explantation.Strong There is no agreement about the outcome of incontinence surgery in obese women. Secondary analysis of an RCT on retropubic and transobturator tapes for treatment of women with SUI suggests that obese women experience inferior outcome compared to non-obese women. Stratification of patients according to BMI (< 30 and > 30) shows a significant difference in objective dry rates (negative pad test) at one year (85.6% vs. 67.8%) and five years (87.4% vs. 65.9%) and subjective cure (absence of SUI symptoms) at one year (85.8% vs. 70.7%) and five years (76.7% vs. 53.6%). At one and five years, 6.7% and 16.3% of patients who were initially dry (negative pad test) after surgery developed a positive pad test [426,427]. Conversely, short-term outcome of single-incision MiniArc® sling showed comparable objective cure rates (negative cough stress test) at two years (86% and 81% in non-obese and obese women, respectively); similar improvement of the Urinary Distress Inventory six and Incontinence Impact Questionnaire seven was observed in non-obese and obese women [428]. Objective cure rate was also similar with Altis® (88% and 87% in non-obese and obese women) at two years follow-up [429]. Age appears to be a significant factor in outcome from SUI surgery but there is conflicting evidence. An RCT of 537 women comparing retropubic to transobturator tape, showed that increasing age was an independent risk factor for failure of surgery over the age of 50 years [430]. An RCT assessing risk factors for the failure of TVT vs. TVT-O in 162 women also found that age was a specific risk factor for recurrence at one year [431]. In addition, based on a sub-analysis of a trial cohort of 655 women at two years’ follow-up, it was shown that elderly women were more likely to have a positive stress test at follow-up, were less likely to report objective or subjective improvement in stress and UUI, and were more likely to undergo retreatment for SUI. There was no difference in time to postoperative normal voiding [432]. Another RCT comparing immediate TVT vs. no surgery (or delayed TVT) in older women, confirmed efficacy of surgery in terms of QoL and satisfaction, but with more complications in the surgical arm [433]. Furthermore, a SR of the efficacy of treatments of UI in older patients suggests that MUS is successful in older patients (> 65 years) with 5.2–17.6% reporting persistent SUI after surgery. No difference in the frequency of de novo UUI, persistent UUI or persistent SUI was found in older patients [361]. Summary of evidenceLEIncontinence surgery may be safely performed in obese women; however, outcomes may be inferior.1The risk of failure from surgical repair of SUI, and the risk of adverse events, appears to increase with age.2bThere is no evidence that any surgical procedure has greater efficacy or safety in older women than another procedure.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingInform obese women with stress urinary incontinence (SUI) about the increased risks associated with surgery, together with the lower probability of benefit.WeakInform older women with SUI about the increased risks associated with surgery, together with the likelihood of lower probability of benefit.Weak 