4.2.4.3.1. General considerations. The use of polypropylene mesh as synthetic MUS for the treatment of SUI has recently come under scrutiny following concerns about long-term complications. In some European countries such as the UK, the use of synthetic MUS has been paused and pelvic mesh was the subject of a parliamentary review published in July 2020 [357]. This review concluded that “For many women mesh surgery is trouble free and leads to improvements in their condition. However, this is not the case for all. There is no reliable information on the true number of women who have suffered complications. While they may be in the minority, that does not diminish the catastrophic nature of their suffering or the importance of providing support to them and learning from what has happened to them”. The range of complications highlighted during the process of this parliamentary review included [357]: pain;recurrent infections;mobility issues;recurring or new incontinence/urinary frequency;recurring or new prolapse;haemorrhage;bowel issues;erosion of mesh; this can be into the vagina and/or other organs;sexual difficulties; including pain on intercourse and a loss of sex life;autoimmune issues;psychological impacts. When considering the choice of surgical treatments for SUI the Panel advises individual clinicians to abide by any national or local rules that may be in place regarding mesh surgery. It is essential for clinicians to point out the deficiencies in the long-term evidence regarding mesh use in SUI with specific reference to the complications highlighted above. In line with the recommendations from NICE [66] and the Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR) paper [358], the Panel agrees that surgeons and centres performing surgery should: be trained in the field of incontinence and for each surgical procedure they perform/offer;perform sufficient numbers of a procedure to maintain expertise of him/herself and the surgical team;be able to offer alternative surgical treatments;be able to deal with the complications of surgery;provide suitable arrangements for long-term follow-up. The establishment of accurate and complete databases registering the interventions, patient profiles and surgical complications or all surgical treatments for SUI is recommended to allow the generation of robust long-term data. Many surgical procedures are available for uncomplicated SUI patients and the Panel analysed the results of the different procedures in terms of clinical effectiveness, safety and cost-effectiveness based on the recent ESTER SR and economic evaluation [359] and previous SRs including those from the Cochrane Collaboration [360-364]. The outcome parameters used to evaluate surgery for SUI have been limited to: continence rate;patient-reported outcome measures;general and procedure-specific complications;generic, specific (UI) and associated (sexual and bowel) QoL. In this context, it has to be taken into account that a number of products may no longer be available and therefore the recommendations may not be transferable to current devices. The Panel makes a strong recommendation that new devices are only used as part of a structured research programme and their outcomes monitored in a registry, until there is adequate evidence of safety and efficacy. 