4.2.4.3.2.3. Urethral bulking agents. The concept of this procedure originates from the idea that intra- or peri-urethral injection of an agent able to form artificial cushions under/around the urethra increases resistance at the bladder outlet and facilitates continence. In a Cochrane SR [369], 2,004 patients were included from fourteen trials of seven different types of intraurethral injection: Ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer (Uryx™), glutaraldehyde cross-linked collagen (Contigent©), a porcine dermal implant (Permacol©), solid silicone elastomer (Macroplastique©), autologous fat, pyrolytic carbon (Durasphere©), calcium hydroxylapatite (Coaptite©), Polytetrafluoroethylene (Polytef™) and hyaluronic with dextran polymer (Zuidex©). The conclusions state that the available evidence base remains insufficient to guide practice [369]. A recent SR of 56 studies conclude that available data support the use of Bulkamid® and Macroplastique®, which have shown a short-term efficacy of 30%–90% and 40%–85%, respectively, and long-term efficacy of 42%–70%, and 21%–80%, respectively. Bulkamid® appears to have a more favourable safety profile, with no cases of erosion or migration of product associated with its use. Direct comparisons of urethral bulking agents were not performed [370]. A SR of 23 studies using Macroplastique© including 958 patients showed a 75% improvement with 43% dry rate at < 6 months and a 64% improvement and 36% cure rate at > 18 months [371]. A review of 514 elderly women with SUI treated with various agents showed a reduced pad weight in 73% at one-year follow-up, independent of the material injected [372]. The heterogeneity of the populations, the variety of materials used and the lack of long-term follow-up limit guidance for practice. Most of the studies showed a tendency for short-term improvement in UI, with the exception of one RCT, which did not find a difference between saline and fat injection [373]. One trial of 30 women showed a weak, non-significant advantage in terms of patient satisfaction after mid-urethral injection in comparison to bladder neck injection but with no demonstrable difference in continence levels [369]. One small trial found 30% (six out of 20) of patients developed retention of urine following peri-urethral injection compared with 5% (one out of 20) with transurethral injection [374]. A small RCT found no difference in efficacy between mid-urethral and bladder neck injection of collagen [375]. One study treated patients who had received radiotherapy with injection of Bulkamid® and reported ~25% cure at short-term follow-up [376]. Bulking agent injection is generally safe, and the most frequent adverse event is UTI. However, autologous fat or hyaluronic acid should not be used due to the risk of fatal embolism and local abscess formation, respectively [373,377]. A study reported that women treated by a high-volume surgeon (defined > 75 urethral bulking injections performed over surgical career) had an increased chance of cure and a lower risk of hospital contact postoperatively, compared with women treated by a low-volume surgeon. The risk of 30-day hospital contact was also lower for women treated in a high-volume department (defined > 15 procedures performed per year) [378]. Comparison with other surgical procedures Two RCTs compared collagen injection to conventional surgery for SUI (silicon particles vs. autologous sling and collagen vs. other surgical procedures). The studies reported greater efficacy but higher complication rates for open surgery [379,380]. In a recent non-inferiority clinical trial, women with primary SUI were randomised to TVT or polyacrylamide hydrogel urethral bulking agent injection (Bulkamid®) [381]. Mid-urethral TVT slings were associated with better satisfaction and cure rates than Bulkamid® in primary SUI. For objective cure rate, the cough stress test was negative in 95.0% of patients who underwent TVT vs. 66.4% who underwent Bulkamid®. Another SR examining the relative efficacy of urethral bulking agents [382] included six studies in the quantitative synthesis for a total of 710 patients. The authors found that bulking agents are less effective than other surgical procedures according to subjective improvement after treatment (relative risk [RR] = 0.70; 95% CI: 0.53-0.92). However, the main limitation of this SR and meta-analysis was the absence of a common objective outcome measure to evaluate effectiveness. 4.2.4.3.2.3.1.Summary of evidence and recommendations for urethral bulking agents Summary of evidenceLEUrethral bulking agents may provide short-term improvement and cure in women with SUI.1bBulking agents are less effective than MUS, Burch colposuspension or autologous sling for cure of SUI and repeat injections may be required in order to achieve sustained benefits.1bAutologous fat and hyaluronic acid as bulking agents have a higher risk of adverse events.1aAdverse event rates for urethral bulking agents are lower compared to open surgery.2aThere is no evidence that one type of bulking agent is better than another.1bThe peri-urethral route of injection of bulking agents may be associated with a higher risk of urinary retention compared to the transurethral route.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer urethral bulking agents to women seeking surgical treatment for stress urinary incontinence (SUI) following a thorough discussion of the risks and benefits relative to other surgical modalities.StrongOffer urethral bulking agents to women with SUI who request a low-risk procedure with the understanding that efficacy is lower than other surgical procedures, repeat injections are likely, and long-term durability and safety are not established.StrongDo not offer autologous fat and hyaluronic acid as urethral bulking agents due to the higher risk of adverse events.Strong 