4.2.4.3.2.4. Laser treatment. A SR including sixteen published studies, involving 899 patients with SUI, evaluated effects of laser treatment. The change in the ICIQ-SF score at one, two, and six months was -5.49, -4.97, and -5.48, respectively. The improvement in a 1-hour pad weight test results at one, three-, and twelve-months post treatment was -5.59, -4.96, and -5.82, respectively. The Pelvic organ prolapse/UI sexual questionnaire (PISQ-12) score increased by 5.39 (95% CI: 1.20-9.58) following treatment. Subgroup analysis identified the type and severity of UI as the potential source of heterogeneity. Adverse effects were reported in six of the sixteen trials and affected only a small number of patients. Most adverse events were mild or moderate and required no medical intervention or resolved in a few days. According to this SR, vaginal laser therapy appears to be a safe, effective, and minimally-invasive treatment option for SUI that can be well tolerated by patients [383]. Another SR including 31 studies and 1,530 women confirmed that laser therapy seems to have a beneficial effect on prolapse and UI, but the level of evidence remains low without any suggestion on the laser type to be used, furthermore no studies are available on cost-effectiveness, in particular looking at a longer-term perspective, because surgical results may have more longevity than laser treatment, which may require re-application [384]. Another SR including a total of 27 studies, evaluated the effects of Er:YAG and Fractional CO2 lasers. The overall quality of studies was poor, and 23/27 studies were case series (LE:4). Er:YAG laser showed a modest reduction in mild SUI cases, with benefits lasting a maximum of thirteen to sixteen months. Fractional CO2 laser showed an improvement of mild SUI in few studies; however, no long-term data are available. When reported, adverse events were insignificant, however, they were not reported systematically [260]. A randomised double-blinded sham-controlled study in women with SUI [385] showed a significant reduction in the ICIQ-UI-SF after Er:YAG laser therapy vs. sham manipulated. However, only 21% were subjectively dry (ICIQ-SF = 0) vs. 4% of sham-operated women. Overall, several limitations have been noted in the current literature regarding vaginal lasers, including variation in laser settings and protocols, short term follow-up, lack of urodynamic evaluation, and poor reporting of appropriate objective measures and adverse events. Based on the available literature, lasers cannot currently be recommended as a treatment option for SUI. 4.2.4.3.2.4.1.Summary of evidence and recommendations for laser treatment Summary of evidenceLESeveral limitations have been noted in the current literature regarding vaginal laser treatment for SUI. These include variation in laser settings and protocols, short term follow-up, lack of urodynamic evaluation, and poor reporting of appropriate objective measures and adverse events.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not offer vaginal laser therapy to treat stress urinary incontinence symptoms outside of a well-regulated clinical research trial.Strong 