6.3. Clinical N3 disease (cN3). 6.3.1. Diagnostic evaluation Patients with clinical N3 disease as defined by the presence of a fixed inguinal mass (i.e., to skin or underlying structures) or pelvic lymphadenopathy based upon imaging should undergo a complete staging evaluation including cross sectional imaging (i.e., PET/CT or CT, see Section 5.2.3), if not already performed [255]. Biopsy of the inguinal mass in the setting of a patient with a known diagnosis of penile cancer is not required but should be performed in a previously undiagnosed patient, as needed, to establish the diagnosis and facilitate accurate staging. 6.3.2. Management strategy Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) is a reasonable strategy among cN3 patients based on the results of a recent SR which reported radiological response rates of approximately 53% and pathological complete response in approximately 12.8% of patients [187,256]. This review consisted mostly of retrospective series; complete response rates in the intention to treat population were 10% (paclitaxel, ifosfamide, and cisplatin [TIP]) and 4% (docetaxel, cisplatin and fluorouracil [TPF]) in prospective trials [177,180]. In responding patients, and those with no evidence of disease progression, surgical resection to remove all residual disease utilizing radical inguinal and PLND techniques is the preferred strategy. For a detailed examination of peri-operative chemotherapy please see Section 6.4.1. Pre-operative radiotherapy was used in a single study among a cN3 cohort of 12 patients and reported an objective response in only 2 patients with 7 of 12 patients subsequently undergoing ILND. Only 2 patients (17%) survived 5 years [257]. It is worth recognising that this data, however, utilises historical radiotherapy techniques precluding meaningful extrapolation to modern practice (see Section 6.4.2 for further details). Surgery as the initial treatment in patients with a fixed inguinal mass or clinically evident pelvic adenopathy (cN3) at presentation or recurrence is discouraged in routine management. While often technically feasible a “surgery first approach” often results in large skin/soft tissue defects, the need for myocutaneous flap reconstruction, prolonged hospital stays (mean or median 8.5–23 days) and is associated with high overall complication rates (65–77%) [258,259]. In a single-centre study among 24 patients treated with surgical debulking alone in the advanced disease setting, the median CSS and DFS were only six and three months, respectively [259]. In the same study 17.5% of patients exhibited rapid progression of disease post-surgery and never received adjuvant therapy [259]. 6.3.3. Patient selection for consolidative radical inguinal/pelvic lymphadenectomy Patients whose tumours respond to NAC and subsequently undergo surgical consolidation represent a favourable subgroup of patients with a mean 5-year survival of 56.9% according to a SR [256]. Among cN3 patients who are not candidates for conventional multi-agent chemotherapy, pre-operative chemo-radiation/radiation can be offered in an attempt to downsize tumours to improve resectability. The evidence for this, however, is recognised to be weak but is being prospectively investigated in the InPACT study [260]. 6.3.4. Surgical technique 6.3.4.1. Inguinal lymph node dissection Surgical resection should proceed 5–8 weeks after completion of chemotherapy to provide time for haematologic recovery and other therapy related symptoms to improve. Pre-operative planning to remove all residual disease taking into consideration the size of the mass, involvement of surrounding structures, and the anticipated skin and soft tissue defects as well as plastic surgical consultation (as appropriate) is required for successful outcomes. 6.3.4.2. Lymphadenectomy boundaries Surgical boundaries should follow that of a ‘radical inguinal lymph node’ dissection” (described in Table 6.1). Wide resection of involved skin is often required with en bloc ILND. Considering the extent of inguinal metastases along with fixation to adjacent structures, minimally-invasive techniques (i.e., robotic-, laparoscopic ILND) are considered inappropriate in cN3 inguinal metastases. 6.3.4.3. Pelvic lymph node dissection Simultaneous PLND should be performed at the time of ILND if pelvic LN metastases were clinically evident at diagnosis. Ipsilateral PLND should also be performed in a simultaneous (preferred) or delayed fashion in the setting of advanced bulky inguinal metastases without clinically evident pelvic metastases as well (i.e., prophylactic). In the latter setting, microscopic pelvic metastases were noted quite frequently (44–100%) in the setting of extracapsular disease and especially when an inguinal mass was present in one series [249]. 6.3.4.4. Surgical complications in cN3 disease Resection of bulky/fixed inguinal masses with or without prior chemotherapy is associated with a variety of complications. Minor complications not requiring hospitalization or surgical intervention are common and tolerable when cure or significant palliation can be achieved. Major post-surgical complications requiring medical or surgical intervention or associated with disability, or death, in several series included infection/sepsis (1.5–4.5%), lymphocele requiring drainage (0–3.8%), wound dehiscence or necrosis requiring debridement (1.5–5.6%), pneumonia (0–2.9%), deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolus (0–8.7% and death (0–5.6%) [180,258,259]. Overall, in the three selected series of patients treated at experienced centres the incidence of major complications as described above was less than one in ten patients with 3/82 (3.9%) patients succumbing to sepsis or other early peri-operative complications. 6.3.5. Summary of evidence and guidelines for the surgical management of cN3 disease Summary of evidenceLESurgery alone will rarely cure patients with cN3 disease.3Even when technically feasible, upfront surgery is associated with significant complications which may delay or prevent delivery of adjuvant therapy.3About half of the patients with advanced (cN2–cN3) penile cancer respond to combination chemotherapy. Responders that subsequently undergo consolidative inguinal/PLND have an OS chance of about 50% at 5 years.2aInguinal LND in cN3 patients often requires resection of overlying skin to effectively remove a fixed bulky nodal mass.4The available literature includes virtually no cN3 patients to assess the efficacy or safety of minimally-invasive ILND.4 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) using a cisplatin- and taxane-based combination to chemotherapy-fit patients with pelvic lymph node involvement or those with extensive inguinal involvement (cN3), in preference to up front surgery. (see Section 6.4.1).WeakOffer surgery to patients responding to NAC in whom resection is feasible.StrongOffer surgery to patients who have not progressed during NAC, but resection is feasible. See also (chemo)radiation.WeakDo not offer Video Endoscopic Inguinal lymphadenectomy.Strong 