6.5. Systemic and palliative therapies for advanced disease. 6.5.1. Introduction Much of our current standard of care for this rare disease has evolved based upon extrapolated experience with similar cancers. The most common regimens utilized today for advanced disease are similar to those routinely used in the peri-operative setting, consisting of platinum-based regimens. Most data come from institutional or retrospective studies, but cooperative groups have occasionally studied this disease via prospective phase II studies. 6.5.2. Chemotherapy Phase II cooperative group studies with bleomycin, methotrexate, and cisplatin (BMP) and irinotecan cisplatin yielded response rates of 31–33% [186,283]. The median OS for BMP was 28 weeks. Toxicity was a concern with both regimens, especially pulmonary toxicity from bleomycin. A retrospective study of cisplatin and 5-FU (PF) presented a response rate of 32% and median OS of 8 months. Toxicity was manageable for this patient population [284]. Addition of taxanes to cisplatin-based regimens was associated with promising activity including CRs. Docetaxel, cisplatin, and fluorouracil (TPF) was prospectively studied in a cohort with distant metastasis (28%) or locally-advanced disease (72%). The response rate was 38.5% and median OS of 14 months; there were 2/26 patents with CR [184]. The study did not meet its efficacy endpoint and toxicity of TPF was a concern. Another prospective study of TPF in exclusively metastatic (M1) disease showed an objective response rate of 38.5% and median OS of 7 months [285]. The latter study did meet its efficacy endpoint and toxicity was interpreted as acceptable. Paclitaxel, ifosfamide and cisplatin (TIP) was prospectively studied in patients with metastases confined to LNs (N2–3, M0), having a response rate of 50% in this select population and 3/30 with surgically verified CRs [180]. Toxicity was manageable in this setting, but there are limited data available for TIP in distant metastatic disease. A SR of cisplatin-based chemotherapy outcomes with and without taxanes suggested a higher toxicity rate with taxanes, 49% vs. 26% [187]. Vinflunine single-agent chemotherapy was prospectively studied in patients with advanced disease who were not eligible for curative surgery or NAC. Patients were required to have ECOG performance status < 2 and estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) > 60 mL/min. Median age was 70 years with a 27% response rate and median OS of 8.4 months. Toxicity was manageable. A retrospective study of paclitaxel single-agent chemotherapy as second line reported a response rate of 20% and median OS 23 weeks [286]. Two studies of various second-line systemic therapy regimens found median OS of 4.5 – 5.6 months [287,288]. A retrospective study of 101 patients looked at the efficacy of chemotherapy as first-, second- and third-line treatment [287]. The median OS for first-line chemotherapy was 7.2 months and with best supportive care, two months. The second-line regimens in seventeen patients included paclitaxel/carboplatin (41%), cisplatin/capecitabine (12%), paclitaxel (12%), or other (36%). There were two objective responses (12%), three stable disease (18%) and seventeen with progressive disease (71%) as best response. Paclitaxel/carboplatin was also reported in adjuvant and neoadjuvant case series and was well tolerated [289,290]. These data support the recommendation of platinum-based chemotherapy as the preferred approach to first-line palliative systemic therapy. Choices include triplet regimens (TPF, TIP) and doublets (PF, paclitaxel/carboplatin), where doublets appear to have less toxicity. Both TPF and TIP combine two neurotoxic drugs and are not appropriate for patients with pre-existing neuropathy or low GFR. Other comorbidities and functional status should be carefully considered when selecting a regimen. While data for paclitaxel/carboplatin in advanced penile cancer are limited, it is reasonable to extrapolate from its use as palliative treatment of squamous-cell cancers from other sites. An alternative approach is single-agent chemotherapy with vinflunine or a taxane. Effective second-line palliative chemotherapy regimens are lacking. Second-line chemotherapy in multiple studies was associated with median OS of 6 months or less. This is an unmet need that also applies to patients with tumour recurrence after adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy. 6.5.2.1. Immunotherapy Immune-based therapies such as immune-checkpoint blockade, HPV-directed vaccines and adoptive T-cell therapies have emerged as potential treatment options for advanced penile cancer [291]. Given the relatively high expression of PD-L1 in penile SCC, several trials in progress assess checkpoint inhibition in advanced disease. None of these anti-PD(L)1 monotherapy trials has been published thus far. Trials presented at conferences reported response rates of 14–17% [292,293]. Basket studies testing combination therapies have included penile SCC patients. In a phase I-II study of nivolumab combined with cabozantinib, with or without ipilimumab, 3 penile SCC patients were included: one partial response (PR) and 2 stable diseases (SD) were reported [294]. In another study testing the combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab, 5 penile SCC were included reporting 2 patients having SD [295]. In general, inclusion of patients with advanced penile SCC after chemotherapy exposure into early-phase basket trials is highly recommended. 6.5.2.2. Targeted therapies Beyond chemotherapy, currently limited additional systemic options exist. Specific actionable genetic alterations appear rare in this disease. Targeted therapy against epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been tested, similar to SCCs originating from other anatomical regions. Evidence of sporadic activity of several EGFR inhibitors have been reported from a few small clinical studies or case-series [296-298]. Dacomitinib, an orally-available pan-HER inhibitor, was tested as monotherapy in a phase II study including patients with locally-advanced and distant metastatic penile SCC. Twenty-eight patients were included in this study, and the ORR was 32.1% with one patient benefiting with a complete response [299]. Despite PIK3CA gene alterations have been reported as the most frequently identified potentially ‘actionable’ genomic alterations in SCC of the pelvic region, no data currently support the use of selected targeted agents in this disease [300]. 6.5.3. Role of radiotherapy in palliation Radiotherapy is frequently necessary for palliation of penile cancer and should be customized for unique presentations as necessary: e.g., ulcerative fixed LNs or dermal lymphatic spread. While standard palliative regimens should be readily employed, providers should be aware that re-treatment may be necessary for durable disease control [301]. This radio-resistance in some cases has been noted [178]. 6.5.4. Summary of evidence and guidelines for systemic and palliative therapies for advanced penile cancer Summary of evidenceLELow-level data support the use of platinum-based chemotherapy as first-line systemic therapy in advanced disease.3Effective second-line palliative chemotherapy regimens are lacking. Second-line chemotherapy in multiple studies was associated with median OS of six months or less.3Initial phase II or basket studies assessed anti-EGFR therapy or checkpoint inhibition, as monotherapy or combination therapy, in advanced disease. Early evidence of promising clinical activity has been reported in patients with penile cancer.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingSystemic therapiesOffer patients with distant metastatic disease, platinum-based chemotherapy as the preferred approach to first-line palliative systemic therapy.WeakDo not offer bleomycin because of the pulmonary toxicity risk.StrongOffer patients with progressive disease under platinum chemotherapy the opportunity to enroll in clinical trials, including experimental therapies within phase I or basket trials.StrongRadiotherapyOffer radiotherapy for symptom control (palliation) in advanced disease.Strong 