3.20.2. Papillary tumours of the bladder in children and adolescents (Papillary urothelial neoplasm of low malignant potential or transitional cell carcinoma). 3.20.2.1. Incidence Papillary tumours of the bladder in children and adolescents are extremely rare and are different from papillary tumours in adults. A “grape-like” papillary tumour in young children will be more likely a rhabdomyosarcoma of the bladder, which are not the focus of this guideline. A papillary tumour in older children or adolescents will be more likely be a papillary urothelial neoplasm of low malignant potential (PUNLMP) [1428]. Children with risk factors, such as previous bladder surgery and immunosuppressive medication can also develop a nephrogenic adenoma of the bladder, also presenting as a papillary tumour of the bladder. 3.20.2.2. Differences and similarities of papillary tumours of the bladder in children and adults Gender The overall the risk of a papillary tumour in the bladder in paediatric and young adult patients is approximately double in males compared to females [1429]. 3.20.2.3. Risk factors The majority of these patients have no identifiable risk factors. 3.20.2.4. Presentation The most common symptom at presentation is haematuria; other less common symptoms include abdominal pain, storage LUTS including frequency, dysuria and at times obstructive symptoms [1429]. 3.20.2.5. Investigations and treatment Ultrasound of the genitourinary tract is the first investigation of choice. It is an excellent screening tool and can often accurately diagnose the nature and location of lesion. In children and adolescents, a bladder US of the full bladder is more sensitive compared with adults due to reduced abdominal fat and thinner muscle layer [1430]. In the event of a need to differentiate the renal or bladder origin of the haematuria, a red blood cell morphology will reveal isomorphic blood cells, differentiating a bladder origin. Urine cytology can be performed, however it has very limited value likely due to the low-grade nature of these tumours in children. Cystoscopy should be reserved if a bladder tumour is suspected on imaging for simultaneous diagnosis and treatment, transurethral resection of the tumour. In children, cystoscopy requires general anaesthesia [1431]. 3.20.2.6. Histology All the lesions in the children and adolescent age-group are identified as papillary and over 85% are solitary [1430]. Papillary bladder tumours in patients younger than twenty years of age have low-grade non-invasive disease (WHO classification) [1432]. These findings let pathologists conclude that in children and adolescents, a papillary bladder tumour can be classified as Papillary Urothelial Neoplasm of Low Malignant Potential (PUNLMP). PUNLMP has minimal or no cytological atypia and it differs from low grade transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) which has cytologic atypia, hyperchromatic nuclei and scattered mitosis [1433]. 3.20.2.7. Additional treatment Mitomycin C and Bacillus Calmette-Guérin have both been used in children but there is no evidence of their efficacy due to the rarity of TCC, and especially of high grade TCC [1429]. Hence, as per current evidence, there is no place for instillations in children. 3.20.2.8. Prognosis, recurrence and surveillance The prognosis of papillary tumours of the bladder in children is overall good. The recurrence rate in children and adolescents varies from 8 to 15% [1428-1430]. Mean time to recurrence can vary from 11 to 29 months depending on the study, with recurrences occurring up to 90 months from diagnosis; though 64% occur in the first year [1429]. In certain cases, recurrences can be fairly aggressive [1430]. Strategies are based on the guidelines and protocols of papillary tumours of the bladder in adults. It is advised to follow-up children and adolescents with a history of a PUNLMP initially with a short interval of three to six months in the first year, and thereafter at least yearly with urinanalysis for haematuria and an US of the full bladder. In the event of sudden gross haematuria, the evaluation must be performed immediately. If the tumour was completely resected at primary surgery, standard follow-up cystoscopy is not necessary and may be reserved for children or adolescents with a high recurrence risk or suspected recurrence on bladder US [1430]. The exact duration of follow-up is unknown but this Panel recommends follow-up for at least five years. Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumours of the bladder (IMTB) are rare with nearly 200 cases reported in the literature [1434,1435]. Around 25% occur in children with a median age at diagnosis of 7.5 years and a median tumour size of 5.5 cm. Boys and girls are equally affected [1436]. Usually these tumours are benign, with only very few reported malignant cases [1437]. Treatment is mostly surgical with transurethral resection, but local resection, or partial cystectomy maybe needed in selected cases [1436,1438]. Additionally, a conservative approach is reported [1439]. Histological examination is required to exclude other malignant tumours such as a rhabdomyosarcoma. In children, no recurrence has been reported so far. However due to the malignant potential and few recurrences in adults, follow-up the same as for papillary bladder tumours is recommended. Eosinophilic cystitis Though well described in adults, this inflammatory condition is rare in the paediatric population with less than 100 cases reported in the literature to date [1440]. Its etiology remains unknown, but is thought to be incited by IgE mediated attraction of eosinophils to bladder wall followed by mast cell degranulation. It has been linked to medications, specifically antibiotics such as penicillin, chemotherapeutic agents e.g. cyclophosphamide and mitomycin, and chronic bladder catheterisation [1441,1442]. In children, as opposed to adults, males are more frequently afflicted with seven years being the mean age of presentation, however the condition can be seen throughout childhood even in LUTS [1440,1443]. Irritative bladder symptoms such as dysuria, frequency, urgency and incontinence are the most frequent and can mimic UTI [1444]. Other symptoms include haematuria, suprapubic tenderness and systemic symptoms. Obstructive manifestations due to mass formation in the bladder wall can result in ureteral obstruction leading to hydro-ureteronephrosis, suprapubic mass in infants in addition to voiding dysfunction [1440,1443,1445]. Although associated with allergy only about a third of reported cases had a history of other allergic conditions whereas half had significant eosinophilia or eosinophiluria. Diagnosis is often delayed as symptoms of eosinophilic cystitis (EC) mimic other more common conditions such as UTI and LUTS and most patients will ultimately have undergone imaging studies such as ultrasound, VCUG, CT and MRI, which although not specially diagnostic for the condition, may show bladder wall thickening or even mass formation, with rhabdomyosarcoma constituting an important differential diagnosis. A high index of suspicion for the diagnosis should therefore be maintained when dealing with protracted urinary symptoms not responsive to conventional intervention. Definitive diagnosis can only be attained on tissue biopsy obtained by cystoscopy. Histologically, eosinophilic infiltration of lamina propria and muscularis are seen in acute phases with > 25 eosinophils per high power field considered to be significant [1440,1443,1445]. Management is not standardised; removal of any possible allergens is the obvious first step and there are reports of self-limiting course of the disease. However, empirical treatment with corticosteroids, antibiotics, anticholinergics, and antihistamines, in addition to cyclosporine A have been utilised and lead to resolution of symptoms in most cases. Partial cystectomy has been performed in circumscribed lesions that do not disappear spontaneously. No standard follow-up recommendations exist however surveillance is justified as recurrence has been reported in about a third of patients [1440,1443]. Nephrogenic adenoma Nephrogenic adenomas (NA) in children are rare benign lesions that usually occur in the setting of previous surgery or chronic irritation of urinary tract [1446]. These benign proliferative lesions are most commonly found in the bladder. There is a significant predominance of girls compared to boys (5:1). The exact pathogenesis is unknown. It is proposed to be a metaplastic process of native urothelium in response to chronic injury. Recent evidence suggest that they can be derived from renal tubular cells that shed, migrate, reimplant and proliferate within urothelial mucosa [1447]. Though they are known to occur concurrently with bladder cancer, there are no de novo cases of bladder cancer diagnosed after nephrogenic adenoma. Previous history of bladder surgery such as bladder augmentation or presence of chronic inflammation or irritation is important [1448]. Lesions tend to develop at sites prone to chronic catheterisation injury. Other risk factors include trauma, immunosuppression and radiation. They present with haematuria and storage LUTS with a papillary/ polypoid mass on cystoscopy. The recurrence rate is as high as 80% over 4 years [1446]. The final diagnosis is established by cystoscopy and histopathological review of biopsy specimen. Treatment is excision either by transurethral resection which often requires reresections, partial cystectomy or open excision. Again no standard follow-up recommendations exist however regular follow-up with cystoscopy has been advocated especially for patients with augmented bladders as recurrence seem particularly high in this subgroup [1448]. 3.20.2.9. Summary of evidence and recommendations for papillary tumours of the bladder in children Summary of evidenceLEMajority of paediatric patients have no identifiable risk factors for bladder tumours.3There is no evidence on intravesical therapy for bladder tumours in children and adolescents.4Prognosis of papillary tumours of the bladder in children is good overall.3Inflammatory myofibroblastic bladder tumours are usually benign.3Paediatric EC cases are in a third of cases associated with a history of allergic conditions and in 50% with significant eosinophilia or eosinophiluria.4Paediatric EC patients usually present with irritative and or obstructive urinary symptoms which can mimic UTI or LUTS thereby leading to delayed diagnosis.4In paediatric EC definitive diagnosis can only be attained on tissue biopsy obtained by cystoscopy.4In EC treatment with corticosteroids, antibiotics, anticholinergics, and antihistamines, in addition to cyclosporine A have been utilised and lead to resolution of symptoms in most cases.4No standard follow-up recommendations exist however surveillance is justified as recurrence has been reported in about a third of patients.4NA in children are rare benign lesions that usually occur in the setting of previous surgery or chronic irritation of urinary tract and mainly occurring in the bladder.4NA usually presents with haematuria and or storage LUTS and with a papillary/polypoid mass on seen on cystoscopy.4NA diagnosis is established by cystoscopy and histopathological review of biopsy specimen.4NA treatment is excision either by transurethral resection which often requires reresections, partial cystectomy or open excision.4NA recurrence rate is high thereby justifying regular follow-up.4 RecommendationsLEStrength ratingUltrasound is the first investigation of choice for the diagnosis of paediatric bladder tumours.3StrongCystoscopy should be reserved if a bladder tumour is suspected on imaging for diagnosis and treatment.3StrongAfter histological confirmation, inflammatory myofibroblastic bladder tumours should be resected locally.4WeakFollow-up should be every 3-6 months in the first year, and thereafter at least annually with urinanalysis and an ultrasound for at least 5 years.4StrongHave a high index of suspicion of eosinophilic cystitis (EC) in protracted urinary tract symptoms unresponsive to regular treatment.4StrongRemove any possible allergens as the obvious first step in managing EC.4StrongEosinophilic cystitis can be managed medically with corticosteroids, antibiotics, anticholinergics, and antihistamines, in addition to cyclosporine A.4WeakManage nephrogenic adenoma (NA) by resection either transuretherally or by open excision.4StrongRegular endoscopic follow-up especially for augmented patients with NA is justified.4Weak 