3.20.3. Penile rare conditions. Paediatric lesions of the penis are uncommon but an important part of the paediatric urological practice. The most common of these lesions are cystic penile lesions followed by vascular malformations and neurogenic lesions [1449]. Soft tissue tumours of the male external genitalia are uncommon, but have been described in the paediatric age group and can be malignant [1450]. 3.20.3.1. Cystic lesions Epidermal inclusion cysts are the most common genital cystic lesion and can occur anywhere on the body in both men and women; in the penis it occurs most commonly over the penile shaft varying from 0.1 to 1 cm in diameter. Their epithelium is lined and filled with keratin. It is a painless swelling and can present in the age group with a history of circumcision. Treatment by total surgical excision is mainly indicated for cosmetic or symptomatic (e.g. infection) reasons and should be performed without rupturing the cyst to avoid recurrence [1451].Mucoid cyst of the penis is synonymous with parameatal cyst or genitoperineal cyst of median raphe; they are midline developmental cysts arising from ectopic urethral mucosa filled with mucoid material. They present since birth but are usually detected during adolescence or later. They are usually asymptomatic developing over penile ventral surface around glans and require surgical removal for either cosmetic, functional or symptomatic reasons [1452].Median raphe cysts arise from incomplete closure of genital fold during embryogenesis; they are commonly diagnosed in the first decade of life but can present later as they tend to be asymptomatic [1453]. They are either unilocular or multilocular fluid containing cysts, with a mean size of 0.8 cm but cysts larger than 2 cm have also been reported [1454]. Cysts are centred in dermis, with no connection to urethra or epidermis. Histopathologically, there are 4 types: urethral (urothelium-like epithelium, account for 55% cases), epidermoid, glandular and mixed. They can be treated conservatively and can resolve spontaneously or persist. Cyst aspiration is associated with high risk of recurrence and surgical excision is the treatment of choice. Though most penile cysts are asymptomatic, they may get infected resulting in pain and tenderness. They can also present with ulceration, rupture and urinary obstruction if they are close to the urethral meatus. This along with cosmetic issues means that most caregivers and patients opt for surgical excision.Smegmal cysts or smegmal pearls can be a differential for the cysts above; they are a benign collection of smegma in the sub-preputial space in uncircumcised boys with anticipated spontaneous resolution [1455].Dermoid cyst are congenital, asymptomatic, firm, solitary, subcutaneous cystic lesions occurring commonly in the region of the corona involving the foreskin. Histopathologically they contain sweat and sebaceous glands with elements of hair and squamous epithelium. Pilosebaceous cysts have been described on the glans; they are benign and usually diagnosed after excision. 3.20.3.2. Vascular malformations A broad classification of penile vascular lesions into haemangiomas and vascular malformations was proposed by Ramos in 1999 [1456]. Haemangiomas develop rapidly at birth and involute slowly; they also include pyogenic granulomas which are benign outgrowths of cutaneous capillary vessels formed usually from chronic irritation [1449]. The growth cycle of infantile haemangiomas is divided into early and late proliferative stages, followed by a slow involution phase, completing growth by nine months of age [1457]. Propranolol is currently first line treatment for infantile haemangiomas, the exact mechanism of action is unknown but can include inhibition of angiogenesis, vasoconstriction among others. The dose is in the range of 1.5-2.5 mg/kg, which needs to be continued for 12 to 18 months and then tapered through active or passive weaning to reduce risk of rebound growth [1457]. Other factors leading to rebound growth after propranolol treatment include deep haemangiomas, which occur in about 38% patients despite propranolol therapy, requiring local therapy such as topical timolol, pulsed dye laser or intralesional steroids. After twelve months, the median improvement with treatment is reported as 81% (range 70-90%) based on VAS scores of serial patient photographs. Vascular malformations are congenital lesions of capillary, lymphatic and venous (or slow-flow) or arterial/arteriovenous (fast-flow) origin that enlarge slowly as the patient grows. These include glomus tumours, which are primarily congenital arteriovenous shunts that develop from thermo-regulatory glomus bodies (fastflow vascular malformations). Glomus tumours of the penis can arise on the glans penis, corpora of the penis and as periurethral masses, sometimes accompanied by glomus tumours of fingers and feet [1458]. These are usually asymptomatic at presentation or may have symptoms such as priapism, palpitation and perineal pain. Glomus tumours are benign despite exhibiting high grade nuclear polymorphism. Vascular malformations are usually benign and treated either with laser, sclerotherapy or surgical excision. However, glomus tumours specifically need surgical treatment and follow-up due to the risk of recurrence from incomplete excision [1459]. 3.20.3.3. Neurogenic lesions Penile neurofibroma is an extremely rare lesion arising from perineural and Schwann cells, and occurs usually with evidence of systemic neurofibromatosis or von Recklinghausen syndrome [1460]. They are treated successfully with complete excision [1449]. Rare cases of malignant schwanomas on the penis presumably secondary to malignant transformation of benign neurofibromas have been reported in boys with a strong family history of neurofibromatosis. This type of malignant degeneration of neurofibromatosis occurs in reportedly 5-16% children [1460]. Hence, these patients require long-term follow-up due to risk of recurrence, new tumour formation and malignant transformation. 3.20.3.4. Soft tissue tumours of penis Mesenchymal tumours are rare in the external genitalia and they require excision in order to differentiate between benign and malignant neoplasms. Histopathological characterisation is essential to ensure malignant tumours receive radical treatment with adjuvant therapy or close follow-up [1450]. Presentation is usually of a painless penile mass, that is non-tender and rubbery on examination. Ultrasound maybe useful in characterising the lesion but is not diagnostic; it can exclude urethral invasion if it is close to urethra [1450]. Once an excision biopsy is performed, if aggressive malignant components are found, a further wider resection may be needed. Fibrosarcoma is a rare non-rhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue tumour that arises from fibrous tissue. The infantile form of fibrosarcoma is rare and those occurring on the penis are even rarer in the paediatric age-group. Surgical intervention has a favourable prognosis in the paediatric age group with long-term survival of 90% in sporadic cases [1461]. Myofibroma is a benign congenital lesion that occurs either as a solitary lesion or as a part of myofibromatosis with multiple soft tissue tumours. Excision is necessary for histological diagnosis [1450]. Primary penile teratomas are extremely rare subtype of congenital germ cell tumours, and they tend to be asymptomatic and are subdermal on US with no blood flow on Doppler [1462]. They need aggressive treatment with surgical resection due to their unpredictable behavior and unresponsiveness to chemotherapy. Mature teratomas are benign but immature teratoma or even mixed teratomas with immature components can turn malignant and have the potential to metastasise and recur. 3.20.3.5.Penile Lymphedema Lymphedema in adults is usually secondary to malignancy or infectious disease affecting lymphatic drainage. In the paediatric age group, however, lymphedema is usually primary and generally very rare, affecting 1.2 per 100.000 persons under the age of 20 years [1463]. Of these, only a very small fraction relates to the genital region. Regardless of underlying aetiology, inefficient lymphatic drainage leads to accumulation of subcutaneous lymph which causes tissue swelling and inflammation. This in turn stimulates adipose deposition and fibrosis further exacerbating enlargement. With time the edematous tissue becomes vulnerable to infection, chronic cutaneous changes and disfigurement [1464]. Additionally, when occurring in the genital region urological complications may ensue; such as phimosis, haematuria, bleeding, bladder outlet obstruction, pain, dysuria, lymphorrhea and severe psychological distress due to resultant deformity [1465,1466]. In the largest cohort of male genital oedema in the paediatric age group, 92% of cases were primary; of these only 25% had a discernable familial or syndromic association such as Noonan syndrome, lymphedemadistichiasis or Milroy disease [1465]. Secondary genital lymphedema in children has been reported after inguinal surgery, and non-caseating granulomatous lymphangitis as seen with metastatic Crohn’s disease [1465-1467]. Average age of onset was reported to be 4.5 ± 6.3 years with 61% presenting in infancy, 13% in childhood and the remaining 26% in adolescence. Edema is usually penoscrotal in 72%, isolated scrotal in 24% and very rarely confined exclusively to the penis in 4%. Moreover, concomitant lower limb edema is the rule in two thirds of cases [1465]. There is no general consensus on diagnostic work-up of these patients. History and physical examination (including family history) is usually sufficient. However lymphoscintigraphy can be used as a confirmatory test, more so for limb than genital edema where results can be difficult to interpret [1465]. Ultrasonography is nonspecific, but has been advocated by some to exclude secondary lymphedema by examining the patency of iliac and caval vessels [1468]. Magnetic resonance imaging is useful to exclude other differential diagnoses such as other venous or lymphatic anomalies [1465]. Conservative treatment is the accepted first-line treatment. The mainstay is compression therapy to maintain and prevent further swelling. This can be achieved by compression stockings and undergarments. Additionally, close observation and protection of the skin to prevent excoriations and infection is essential [1465,1468]. Compression therapy is however, less effective on genital oedema than it is on limb edema, especially in growing children. When conservative management fails, and especially in symptomatic cases, or in patients with functional impairment, surgical debulking may be necessary. This can either take the form of circumcision in cases where the foreskin is affected or excision of affected skin and subcutaneous tissues with restructuring and contouring for optimal cosmetic outcome. Complete skin excision and grafting may also be required [1465-1468]. Surgical management can be challenging and needs to be restricted to patients with significant symptoms. Complications include recurrences, continuous lymphatic leakage, haematoma, infection and poor cosmetic outcome [1463,1468,1469]. Summary of evidenceLECystic penile lesions are the commonest paediatric penile lesions followed by vascular malformations and neurogenic lesions.3Neurofibroma patients require long-term followup due to risk of recurrence, new tumour formation and malignant transformation.3Mesenchymal tumours are rare and require excision in order to differentiate between benign and malignant neoplasms.3 RecommendationsLEStrength ratingTreatment of penile cystic lesions is by total surgical excision, it is mainly indicated for cosmetic or symptomatic (e.g. infection) reasons.4WeakPropranolol is currently first line treatment for infantile hemangiomas.2bStrongConservative management is the first-line treatment for penile lymphedema.4StrongIn symptomatic cases or in patients with functional impairment, surgical intervention may become necessary for penile lymphedema.4Weak 