3.1.5.1. Single kidney transplant - living and deceased donors. The standard surgical approach for first or second single kidney transplant (SKT) operations remains open kidney transplant (OKT). Emerging surgical technologies using minimal access surgical approaches have been developed and the different surgical approaches (minimally invasive open, laparoscopic and robot-assisted) were compared in a systematic review [101]. An extra-peritoneal approach to either iliac fossa should be used as the operative approach in most first or second single kidney transplant (SKT) operations. There is no evidence to prefer placement of a left or right kidney into either iliac fossa [102]. Peri-iliac vessel lymphatics should be ligated to try and prevent post-operative lymphocele. Appropriate segments of iliac artery and vein should be mobilised to facilitate appropriate tension free vascular anastomoses and the final positioning of the transplanted kidney. There is evidence supporting the benefits of cooling the kidney surface during implantation [103]. RecommendationsStrength ratingChoose either iliac fossa for placement of a first or second single kidney transplant.WeakLigate peri-iliac vessel lymphatics (lymphostasis) to reduce post-operative lymphocele.Weak A variety of techniques have been described to help with the anastomosis of a short renal vein. This is most commonly encountered with a right kidney especially from a living donor. To achieve equivalent outcomes with right kidneys appropriate surgical technical manoeuvres may be needed to optimise right kidney implantation. A number of studies suggest marginally worse outcomes with use of the right compared to left kidney, two large registry studies demonstrate a slightly higher risk of early graft failure using right compared to left kidneys from living donors [104-106]. Registry study of 2,450 paired kidneys, donated after cardiac death, observed with right kidneys: more early surgical complications; an increased risk in DGF (Odds Ratio [OD] 1.46); and inferior one year graft survival (OD 1.62), but not at subsequent time points [105]. However, surgical techniques used to compensate for a right kidney, anastomosis time and surgeon experience were not recorded. A recent registry study of 87,112 deceased-donor kidney recipient pairs reported a modest increase in DGF (adjusted OD 1.15) and all-cause graft failure (adjusted hazard ratio 1.07), within the first six months, associated with use of the right kidney, but there was no association with recipient mortality [107]. Furthermore, data from cohort studies [101,103] and one registry study [104] suggest equivalent outcomes with either left or right deceased donor kidneys. Meta-analysis of data from one RCT and fourteen cohort studies suggested equivalent graft outcomes [108]. Overall, these findings do not support declining an organ for kidney transplantation based on laterality of kidney offered. Techniques to manage a short renal vein can be addressed in the donor and/or recipient. Ligation of internal iliac vein(s) may be necessary to elevate the iliac vein and avoid tension on the renal vein anastomosis [102]. Transposition of the iliac artery and vein may enhance the position for the venous anastomosis [109]. The right renal vein may be lengthened. With deceased donor kidneys this is usually done with donor inferior vena cava (IVC) [110]. In living donors, lengthening of the renal vein may be achieved with donor gonadal vein retrieved at donor nephrectomy [111] or with recipient saphenous vein [112], although both require specific consent and in general the other aforementioned techniques are preferred. Summary of evidenceLEProspective cohort studies demonstrated that:transposition of the recipient iliac vein is an appropriate technical solution to compensate for the short length of the renal vein in right kidney LDN (n=43);the living donor right kidney renal vein can be successfully lengthened using donor gonadal vein (n=17) or recipient saphenous vein (n=19).3 RecommendationStrength ratingAssess the length of the donor renal vein and if it is short consider one of a variety of surgical techniques to optimise the venous anastomosis.Weak A history suggesting previous iliac or femoral vein thrombosis should initiate pre-operative imaging to establish patency of one iliac vein and the IVC. An intra-operative finding of an unexpected iliac vein and/or vena cava thrombosis may lead to abandonment of implantation. With pre-operative planning, native renal (orthotopic) or superior mesenteric vein or gonadal vein collaterals can be used. The external or common iliac arteries are equally good for arterial anastomosis. The internal iliac artery is more frequently affected by atherosclerosis than the external or common iliac arteries. End-to-side anastomosis of donor renal artery to recipient external and/or common iliac artery is recommended in general over an end-to-end anastomosis to the internal iliac artery. The only RCT comparing these techniques suggests no difference [113]. However, the study was limited by small numbers and a high (8%) overall renal artery thrombosis rate. The sites of the vascular anastomosis should be chosen carefully according to the length of the renal artery and vein to avoid kinking of the vessels when the kidney is placed into its final location, usually in the iliac fossa. The site of the arterial anastomosis should avoid atheromatous plaques in the iliac artery to decrease the risk of iliac artery dissection. The intima of the donor and recipient arteries should be checked prior to commencing the arterial anastomosis to ensure that there is no intimal rupture/flap. If this is found it must be repaired prior to, or as part of, the arterial anastomosis. A Carrel patch is usually maintained on a deceased donor renal artery although it can be removed if there is either severe ostial atheroma/stenosis (with good quality proximal renal artery) or if the length of the renal artery is too long for the appropriate implantation site on the iliac artery (which is more common with the right renal artery). Multiple renal arteries supplying a deceased donor kidney can be maintained on a Carrel patch (of appropriate length) and implanted as a single anastomosis. In living donor transplantation, multiple renal arteries require a variety of strategies to achieve optimum re-perfusion [99]. Two arteries can be implanted separately or to achieve a single anastomosis: a very small second artery (especially if supplying the upper pole) may be sacrificed; the two arteries may be joined together (as a trouser graft); or the smaller artery can be anastomosed onto the side of the main artery (end-to-side anastomoses). A lower polar artery may be re-vascularised via anastomosis to the inferior epigastric artery [114]. In living donor transplantation where three or more donor arteries exist consideration should be given to alternate kidney donors. In circumstances using a living donor kidney with three or more donor arteries, strategies include a combination of the above techniques or, after appropriate consent, use an explanted (recipient’s own) internal iliac artery graft [115] or saphenous vein graft [116]. In cases where an iliac artery prosthetic replacement has previously been carried out because of severe symptomatic iliac atheroma, the renal artery should be implanted into the prosthesis. Administration of systemic heparin should be considered prior to clamping of a vascular prosthesis [117]. A variety of sutures and suturing techniques for the vascular anastomosis are described, but in general practice, a 5/0 and 6/0 non-absorbable mono-filament polypropylene suture(s) are used for the renal vein and renal artery anastomosis. Despite this, there is no evidence to recommend one suturing technique over another to prevent, for example, transplant artery stenosis. Use of an expanded polytetrafluroethylene suture compared to standard polypropylene suture may reduce blood loss due to a better needle/thread ratio [118]. In third or further transplants the surgical approach must be planned pre-operatively so that appropriate arterial inflow and venous outflow exists with adequate space to implant the new kidney [119,120]. Nephrectomy of an old transplant kidney may be required prior to transplantation or at the time of transplantation [119]. Mobilisation of the common or internal iliac artery, internal iliac vein or IVC may be required. An intra-peritoneal approach (via the iliac fossa or midline) may be required [121]. Rarely orthotopic transplantation is needed [119,122]. Evidence suggests that minimising the anastomosis time and/or rewarming time results in reduced DGF [123]. The effect on long term graft function is uncertain, but may also be impacted by short anastomosis time [124]. Summary of evidenceLEA small RCT (n=38) comparing end-to-end anastomosis to the internal iliac artery vs. end-to-side anastomosis to the external iliac artery found that both techniques showed similar results in the post-operative period and at three-years follow-up.1bCohort studies have demonstrated third or further transplants are a valid therapeutic option with reasonable short- and long-term patient and graft survival.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingUse the external or common iliac arteries for an end-to-side arterial anastomosis to donor renal artery.WeakUse an end-to-end anastomosis to the internal iliac artery as an alternative to external or common iliac arteries.WeakCheck the intima of the donor and recipient arteries prior to commencing the arterial anastomosis to ensure that there is no intimal rupture/flap. If this is found it must be repaired prior to/as part of the arterial anastomosis.StrongPre-operatively plan the surgical approach in third or further transplants, to ensure that appropriate arterial inflow and venous outflow exists with adequate space to implant the new kidney.Strong 