3.1.5.4. Ureteric implantation in normal urinary tract. Ureteric anastomotic techniques described for renal transplant recipients with no underlying urological abnormality include: extra (Lich-Gregoir) or intra (Leadbetter-Politano) vesical uretero-neo-cystotomy and uretero-ureterostomy using native ureter. A meta-analysis [137] of two RCTs and 24 observational studies favoured the extra-vesical Lich-Gregoir technique to an intravesical approach leading to reduced overall complications (specifically urine leak, stricture and post-operative haematuria). Fewer urinary tract infections (UTIs) were observed with the extravesical approach when compared with the intra-vesical technique in one RCT [138]. Pyelo- or uretero-ureterostomy to the ipsilateral native ureter has been described as a primary technique in recipients with non-refluxing native ureters [139]. A meta-analysis suggested ureteric stricture, obstruction, and stone formation were more common after uretero-ureterostomy whereas vesicoureteral reflux and UTIs were more common after uretero-neo-cystostomy [140]. The donor ureter should be kept as short as possible with peri-ureteric fat preserved to ensure adequate ureteric blood supply. The location on the bladder to position an extra-vesical anastomosis was shown in one small RCT to be advantageous at the posterior bladder rather than anterior position to facilitate future endoscopic manipulation if needed, and reported less hydronephrosis post stent removal [141]. In cases where donor ureter has been damaged at retrieval then pyelo-native-ureterostomy or pyelo-neo-cystotomy can be performed. Mono-filament absorbable sutures should be used for the urinary anastomosis to prevent stone formation around the suture material [142]. Summary of evidenceLEA meta-analysis of two RCTs and 24 observational studies favoured the extra-vesical Lich-Gregoir technique for reduced overall complications.1aA multi-centre prospective comparison study found the incidence of overall complications was similar for pyelo- and uretero-ureteral anastomosis and that for both procedures no graft was lost due to urological complications.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform Lich-Gregoir-like extra-vesical ureteric anastomosis technique to minimise urinary tract complications in renal transplant recipients with normal urological anatomy.StrongPyelo/uretero-ureteral anastomosis is an alternative especially for a very short or poorly vascularised transplant ureter.Strong Transplant ureteric anastomosis can be performed with or without a ureteric stent. If a stent is placed a second procedure is generally required for removal. A Cochrane review [143] concluded that stents are recommended to reduce major urological complications, especially urinary leak. The optimal timing for stent removal has yet to be defined [144]. A meta-analysis of five RCTS including 568 kidney transplantation patients showed a significant reduction in UTIs for early (≤ 7 days) vs. late removal (≥ 14 days) [145]. No significant differences where observed between the two groups in relation to post-operative complications such as ureteral stricture, ureteral obstruction, and ureteral leakage [145]. A second meta-analysis including 3,612 patients also reported a significant reduction in UTIs with early stent removal (< 3weeks) vs. late removal (> 3 weeks) [146]. No significant differences where observed between the two groups regarding the incidents of ureteral stenosis and ureteral leakage [146]. Most commonly, stents are removed with local anaesthetic flexible cystoscopy unless there is a need to combine with another procedure warranting general anaesthetic. Various techniques to reduce the morbidity of a second procedure involve tying the stent to the catheter or use of percutaneous stents [147]. RecommendationStrength ratingUse transplant ureteric stents prophylactically to prevent major urinary complications.Strong Duplex ureters are not infrequently identified at organ retrieval/kidney benching or during work-up for LDN [148,149]. Duplex ureters can be anastomosed together and then joined to the bladder as one unit (double pant) or kept as two separate anastomoses. This also applies to the two single ureters in DKT in adults or with en-bloc transplantation from paediatric donors. The arguments for two separate ureteric anastomoses to the bladder are that an already tenuous blood supply may be further compromised with added suturing and handling, and if there is an issue with one ureter the other should remain unaffected. The advantages to forming one single (two ureter) anastomosis to the bladder are that only one cystotomy is needed; it may be faster and complications may be reduced. There is a lack of high quality evidence relating to duplex ureters. RecommendationStrength ratingUse the same surgical principals for single ureters to manage duplex ureters and anastomose them either separately or combined.Strong 