3.1.5. Surgical approaches for first, second, third and further transplants. Transplant (bench/back-table) preparation is a crucial step in the transplantation process. The kidney must be inspected whilst on a sterile ice slush, removing peri-nephric fat when possible to permit inspection of the quality of the organ and to exclude exophytic renal tumours. Biopsy of the kidney on the back-table may be performed to help in the multifactorial decision-making process regarding the quality and usage of the kidney for both single and/or dual transplantation. Suspicious parenchymal lesions also require biopsy. Techniques for intra-operative kidney biopsy are discussed in section 3.1.3. The number, quality and integrity of renal vessels and ureter(s) should be established and lymphatics at the renal hilum ligated. The quality of the intima of the donor renal artery should be evaluated. Branches of the renal artery not going to the kidney or ureter(s) should be tied. In deceased donor kidney transplantation the quality of the aortic patch should be determined. If severe atheroma of the patch, ostium or distal renal artery is seen then the aortic patch and/or distal renal artery can be removed to provide a better quality donor renal artery for implantation. Back table reconstruction of multiple donor arteries is discussed in section 3.1.5.1. The length of the renal vein should be evaluated. Renal vein branches should be secured/tied. For a deceased donor right kidney, lengthening the renal vein on the back table may be performed if needed with donor inferior vena cava [100]. Techniques for lengthening a short living donor right renal vein from donor gonadal vein or recipient saphenous vein require pre-operative planning and specific consent (discussed in section 3.1.5.1). The length, quality and number of the ureter(s) should be established. The peri-pelvic and proximal peri-ureteral tissue in the ‘golden triangle’ should be preserved. RecommendationStrength ratingAssess the utility (including inspection) of the kidney for transplantation before commencement of immunosuppression and induction of anaesthesia for deceased donor kidney transplantation.Strong 