3.22.3. Paediatric bladder injuries. The paediatric bladder is less protected than the adult bladder, and is therefore more susceptible to injuries, especially when full, due to: Its higher position in the abdomen and its exposure above the bony pelvis.The fact that the abdominal wall provides less muscular protection.The fact that there is less pelvic and abdominal fat surrounding the bladder to cushion it during trauma. Blunt trauma is the most common cause of significant bladder injury. In adults, bladder injury is often associated with pelvic fractures. This is less common in children because the paediatric bladder sits above the pelvic ring. In a large prospective study, only 57% of children with pelvic fractures also had a bladder injury compared to 89% of adults [1506]. 3.22.3.1. Diagnostic evaluation The characteristic signs of bladder injury are suprapubic pain and tenderness, an inability to urinate, and visible haematuria (95% of injuries). Patients with a pelvic fracture and visible haematuria present with a bladder rupture in up to 45% of cases [1507]. The diagnosis of bladder rupture can be difficult in some cases. The bladder should be imaged both when fully distended and after drainage using standard radiography or with axial imaging (e.g., CT scan). Optimal imaging results are achieved through retrograde filling of the bladder using a catheter. Despite advances in CT imaging, the bladder must still be filled to capacity to accurately diagnose a possible bladder injury [1508]. Blunt injuries to the bladder are categorised as: Contusions with damage to the bladder mucosa or muscle, without loss of bladder wall continuity or extravasation.Ruptures, which are either intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal. Intraperitoneal bladder ruptures are more common in children because of the bladder’s exposed position and the acute increase in pressure during trauma. These cause the bladder to rupture at its weakest point, i.e., at the dome. Extraperitoneal lesions occur in the lower half of the bladder and are almost always associated with pelvic fractures. A cystogram should demonstrate extravasation into the perivesical soft tissue in a typical flame pattern and the contrast material is confined to the pelvis. 3.22.3.2. Management Contusions usually present with varying degrees of haematuria and are treated with catheter drainage alone. 3.22.3.2.1. Intraperitoneal injuries The accepted management of intraperitoneal bladder ruptures is open surgical exploration and primary repair. Post-operative drainage with a suprapubic tube is mandatory. Recent data suggest that transurethral drainage may be as effective, with fewer complications, resulting in shorter periods of diversion [1509]. Usually, after about seven to ten days, a repeat cystogram is performed to ensure adequate healing. 3.22.3.2.2. Extraperitoneal injuries Non-operative, supportive management with catheter drainage for seven to ten days is the method of choice for extraperitoneal bladder rupture. However, if there are bone fragments within the bladder, these must be removed and the bladder must then be repaired and drained, according to the principles for treating intraperitoneal ruptures [1510]. 3.22.3.3. Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of paediatric bladder injuries RecommendationsStrength ratingUse retrograde cystography to diagnose suspected bladder injuries.StrongEnsure that the bladder has been filled to its full capacity and an additional film is taken after drainage.StrongManage extra-peritoneal bladder ruptures conservatively with a transurethral catheter left in place for seven to ten days.StrongPerform surgical exploration in cases of intra-peritoneal bladder ruptures.Strong 