3.22.4. Paediatric urethral injuries. Except for the penile part of the urethra, the paediatric urethra is quite well protected. In addition, its shape and elasticity means that the urethra is seldom injured by trauma. However, a urethral injury should be suspected in any patient with a pelvic fracture or significant trauma to the perineum until confirmed otherwise by a diagnostic work-up. 3.22.4.1. Diagnostic evaluation Patients with suspected urethral trauma and pelvic fractures usually present with a history of severe trauma, often involving other organ systems. Signs of urethral injury include blood at the meatus, visible haematuria, pain during voiding, or an inability to void. There may also be perineal swelling and haematoma involving the scrotum. A rectal examination to determine the position and fixation of the prostate is important in any male with a suspected urethral injury. The prostate (although small), as well as the bladder, may be displaced up out of the pelvis, especially in membranous urethral trauma. Radiographic evaluation of the urethra requires a retrograde urethrogram. It is important to expose the entire urethral length, including the bladder neck. If a catheter has already been placed and there is a suspected urethral trauma, the catheter should not be removed. Instead, a small infant catheter can be placed into the distal urethra along the catheter to allow the injection of contrast material for a diagnostic scan [1511]. 3.22.4.2. Disease management As these patients may be unstable due to the nature of their injuries, the urologist’s initial responsibility is to provide a method of draining and monitoring urine output. A transurethral catheter should only be inserted if there is a history of voiding after the traumatic event, and if a rectal and pelvic examination, as described above, has not suggested a urethral rupture. If the catheter does not pass easily, an immediate retrograde urethrogram should be performed. A suprapubic tube may be placed in the emergency department percutaneously, or even in the operating room if the patient has to undergo immediate exploration because of other life-threatening injuries. There are often no associated injuries with a bulbar urethral or straddle injury and management is therefore usually straightforward. In these cases, a transurethral catheter is the best option for preventing urethral bleeding and/or painful voiding [1512]. The initial management of posterior urethral injuries remains controversial, mainly regarding the long-term results with primary realignment compared to simple suprapubic drainage with later reconstruction. The main goals in the surgical repair of posterior urethral injuries are: Providing a stricture-free urethra.Avoiding the complications of urinary incontinence and erectile dysfunction. Anterior urethral injury The data for anterior urethral injury repair is much the same as for adults. Small lacerations can be repaired by simple closure. Complete ruptures without extensive tissue loss are treated with anastomotic repair [1513]. Penetrating injuries require peri- and post-operative antibiotic treatment [1514]. Immediate urethroplasty is generally performed in blunt injuries. The long term-outcomes (patency rate, potency rate) of adult patients treated with immediate urethroplasty is similar to these initially treated with suprapubic diversion and delayed urethroplasty [1515]. The main advantage of performing immediate urethroplasty is that this strategy significantly reduces the time to spontaneous voiding from two to six months to three weeks on average. Spongiosal contusion and haematoma during immediate urethroplasty will make the operation technically more demanding; therefore, immediate urethroplasty should be performed by a dedicated urethral surgeon [1516]. Posterior urethral injury Unlike anterior urethral injuries with immediate realignment, in children with posterior urethral injuries, a staged approach with delayed repair may be more appropriate. In children, there is significantly less experience with delayed repair, with a large paediatric series of delayed repair in 68 boys reporting succesfull voiding and continence rate of 90% [1517]. Another study reported strictures and erectile dysfunction in 67% of boys, although all the boys were continent post-operatively [1310]. A follow-up study on fifteen patients who underwent delayed urethroplasty for blunt urethral trauma during childhood reported high long-term success rates, with a low rate of long-term urinary and sexual dysfunction in adulthood [1518]. Revision surgery A large study of revision urethroplasty analysing revision urethroplasty following pelvic floor urethral injuries in children and adolescents demonstrated that these injuries appeared to be more common in the developing world, with more complex findings and longer gaps. These patients in support of the above findings were best managed with delayed transperineal repair with self-reported success of up to 85% [1519]. On the other hand, a small prospective study demonstrated good results with immediate primary endoscopic realignment in patients with posterior urethral and bladder neck injuries [1520]. This may serve as an alternative to those with permitting endoscopic anatomy post-injury. A large study exploring outcomes on different urethroplasty techniques in both boys and girls demonstrated that most paediatric pelvic floor urethral injuries can be addressed through a transperineal approach with reasonable long-term outcomes (>80%), however up to 25% patient require further endoscopic/open procedures during follow-up. In challenging cases salvage procedures utilizing vascular-based flaps as a urethral substitute can yield good results, however the numbers lost to follow-up were significant at 40.6% [1521]. In a study of eighteen boys undergoing urethroplasty for strictures (traumatic/iatrogenic), post-void dribbling and urgency were the main patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) following surgery, with universally high satisfaction rates. PROMs are an important consideration for urologists performing these procedures on children, as they will likely need continued long-term follow-up [1522]. In those who have previously experienced a failed urethroplasty following pelvic-fracture associated urethral injuries, most cases of recurrent posterior urethral strictures of < 3 cm in length can be operated through a perineal urethroplasty with reasonable success rates. Complex and long-segment (higher than 3 cm) strictures require use of ancillary procedures like trans-pubic urethroplasty, substitution urethroplasty and Mitrofanoff appendicovescostomy with complication rates in adolescents of 33% [1523]. 3.22.4.3. Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of paediatric trauma RecommendationsStrength ratingAssess the urethra by retrograde urethrogram in case of suspected urethral injury.StrongPerform a rectal examination to determine the position of the prostate.StrongManage urethral injuries conservatively initially if a transurethral catheter can be placed.StrongManage posterior urethral injuries by either:primary drainage with a suprapubic catheter alone and delayed repairprimary re-alignment with a transurethral catheterWeak 