3.22.1. Paediatric renal trauma. 3.22.1.1. Epidemiology, aetiology and pathophysiology Of all renal injuries, about 25% occur in children, of which 79% is low-grade (I, II or III) and 21% is high-grade (IV or V) [1483]. The most common cause is blunt abdominal trauma (90%), and in blunt abdominal trauma the kidney is the most commonly affected organ, accounting for about 10% of all blunt abdominal injuries [1484]. Children are more likely than adults to sustain renal injuries after blunt trauma due to several anatomical factors, including decreased perirenal fat, weaker abdominal musculature, a relative large size of the kidney in relation to the rest of the body, foetal lobulations which result in a higher likelihood of a local parenchymal disruption, and a less ossified rib cage [1488]. Blunt renal trauma is frequently associated with injury to other organs as well [1489]. 3.22.1.2. Classification systems Renal injuries are classified according to the kidney injury scale of the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (Table 11) [1490]. Table 11: Renal injury classified according to the kidney injury scale of the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma [1490] GradeType of injuryDescriptionIHaematoma and/or contusionSubcapsular hematoma and/or parenchymal contusion without laceration.IIHaematomaPerirenal hematoma confined to Gerota fascia.LacerationRenal parenchymal laceration ≤ 1 cm depth without urinary extravasation.IIILacerationRenal parenchymal laceration > 1 cm depth without collecting system rupture or urinary extravasation.VascularAny injury in the presence of a kidney vascular injury or active bleeding contained within Gerota fascia.IVLacerationParenchymal laceration extending into urinary collecting system with urinary extravasation;Renal pelvis laceration and/or complete ureteropelvic disruption.VascularSegmental renal vein or artery injuryActive bleeding beyond Gerota fascia into the retroperitoneum or peritoneum;Segmental or complete kidney infarction(s) due to vessel thrombosis without active bleeding.VLacerationShattered kidney with loss of identifiable parenchymal renal anatomy.VascularMain renal artery or vein laceration or avulsion of hilumDevascularized kidney with active bleedingVascular injury is defined as a pseudoaneurysm or arteriovenous fistula and appears as a focal collection of vascular contrast that decreases in attenuation with delayed imaging. Active bleeding from a vascular injury presents as vascular contrast, focal or diffuse, that increases in size or attenuation in delayed phase. Vascular thrombosis can lead to organ infarction. Grade based on highest grade assessment made on imaging, at operation or on pathologic specimen. More than one grade of kidney injury may be present and should be classified by the higher grade of injury. Advance one grade for bilateral injuries up to Grade III. 3.22.1.3. Diagnostic evaluation In a child who has sustained blunt abdominal trauma, renal involvement can often be suspected from the history, physical examination and laboratory evaluation. Renal involvement may be associated with abdominal or flank tenderness, lower rib fractures, fractures of vertebral pedicles, trunk contusions and abrasions, and haematuria. Vital signs should be monitored during the initial evaluation and give the most reliable indication of the urgency of the situation. It is important to consider that children, unlike adults, are able to maintain their blood pressure, even in the presence of hypovolaemia, due to compliance of the vascular tree and mechanisms for cardiac compensation [1485]. It is compulsory to consider all the clinical aspects involved, including the history, physical examination, consciousness of the child, overall clinical status and laboratory findings to decide on the diagnostic algorithm and whether or not a child needs further imaging studies. In severe renal injuries, 65% of patients suffer gross haematuria and 33% non-visible haematuria, while 2% have no haematuria at all [1486]. There have been several reports of significant renal injuries that manifest with little or even no blood in the urine [1487]. 3.22.1.3.1. Choice of imaging method FAST-ultrasound In severe trauma or haemodynamically instable patients, FAST (Focussed Assessment Sonography in Trauma) can be used to identify a hemoperitoneum, with a high specificity (95%) but low sensitivity (33-89%) and negative predictive value (50%). However, sensitivity and specificity for kidney trauma and retroperitoneal hemorrhage is low, therefore it is not recommended as a sole diagnostic tool [1491]. Computed tomography Computed tomography scanning is the imaging modality of choice in patients with suspicion of renal injuries, since it is widely available, quick and provides accurate grading [1492]. Ideally it is performed in three phases: the arterial phase to detect vascular injury or active bleeding, the nephrogenic phase to detect parenchymal lacerations, and the delayed phase to detect injury of the collecting system or ureter. Furthermore, CT scanning can detect associated other intra-abdominal injuries, which are frequently associated with renal trauma, especially in grade III – V [1489]. Scanning protocol should be adapted for pediatric patients according to ALARA (as low as reasonable achievable) principles to reduce the amount of ionizing radiation as much as possible. Ultrasound (Contrast-enhanced) ultrasound can be considered as the sole investigation in patients with mild symptoms and no other indications for CT-scanning, where the mechanism of trauma and the condition of the patient do not suggest the presence of injury to other organs or the urinary tract. Although conventional ultrasound is not accurate to grade renal trauma, there could be a role for contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) to identify parenchymal lesions, however this technique cannot detect injuries to the urinary tract or collecting system since the contrast agent is not excreted by the kidney [1493]. Ultrasound can be performed in follow-up of a renal trauma to reduce the amount of radiation. However, even in high-grade renal trauma, routine repeat imaging may be avoidable in asymptomatic, stable patients [1494]. 3.22.1.4. Disease management The modern management of trauma is multidisciplinary, requiring paediatricians, emergency physicians, surgeons, urologists, and other specialties as required. Non-surgical conservative management with bed rest, fluids and monitoring has become the standard approach for treating blunt renal trauma. In high-grade renal injuries, a conservative approach is effective and recommended for hemodynamically stable children [1495]. However, this approach requires close clinical observation and intermittent re-assessment of the patient’s overall condition. Therefore, a good initial trauma CT with delayed images to check for urinary extravasation is recommended, since patients with a urine leak have higher morbidities, including febrile episodes and an increased requirement of operative or image-guided interventions [1496]. However, early drainage does not seem to prevent persistent urinary extravasation or complications [1497]. Therefore, reserve stenting and/or percutaneous drainage only when the patient is symptomatic [1498]. Emergency intervention is indicated only for haemodynamic instability, and if available angio-embolisation for ongoing or delayed bleeding is preferred compared to open surgery. The results of angio-embolisation were evaluated and were successful in 92% of patients with grade III-IV (294/322) and 76% of grade V (63/82) injuries. Furthermore, the success rate was 90% (312/346) in hemodynamically stable patients, but only 63% (42/66) in hemodynamically unstable patients [1499]. Absolute indications for surgery include persistent bleeding into an expanding or unconfined haematoma with haemodynamic instability. Relative indications for surgery are massive urinary extravasation and extensive non-viable renal tissue [1500]. Follow-up In paediatric patients with renal trauma, routine blood pressure checks to diagnose hypertension is recommended in the long-term follow-up since posttraumatic renal hypertension rate varies between 4.2 – 18%, especially in cases with concomitant vascular injury [1495,1501]. However, there is a dearth of long-term data on the risk of developing hypertension in children. 3.22.1.5. Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of paediatric renal trauma RecommendationsStrength ratingUse imaging in all children who have sustained a blunt or penetrating trauma irrespective of the presence of haematuria, especially when the history reveals a deceleration trauma, direct flank trauma or a fall from a height.StrongUse contrast enhanced CT-scanning with delayed images for diagnostic and staging purposes.StrongManage most injured kidneys conservatively.StrongPerform angio-embolisation or surgical intervention in case of haemodynamic instability or a Grade V renal injury.Strong 