3.22.2. Paediatric ureteral trauma. Injuries to the ureter are rare. The ureter is well protected; the upper part is protected by its close approximation to the vertebral column and paraspinal muscles and the lower part by its route through the bony pelvis. In addition, the ureter is a small target, and both flexible and mobile. This also means that ureteral injuries are caused more often by penetrating trauma than blunt trauma [1502]. Since the ureter is the sole conduit for urinary transport between the kidney and the bladder, any ureteral injury can threaten the function of the ipsilateral kidney. 3.22.2.1. Diagnostic evaluation As there are no classical clinical symptoms suggestive of ureteral trauma, it is important to carry out a careful diagnostic work-up using different imaging modalities. Unfortunately, initial imaging studies, such as IVP and routine CT scans, are unreliable. A study of eleven disruptions of the ureteropelvic junction found that 72% had a normal or non-diagnostic IVP on initial studies [1502]. Diagnostic accuracy of CT scanning can be improved by performing a delayed CT scan up to ten minutes after injection of the contrast material [1503]. The most sensitive diagnostic test is a retrograde pyelogram. It is not uncommon for patients to present several days after the injury, when the urinoma produces flank and abdominal pain, nausea and fever. Due to symptoms being often vague, it is important to remain suspicious of a potential undiagnosed urinary injury following significant blunt abdominal trauma in a child. 3.22.2.2. Management Immediate repair during abdominal exploration is rare. Minimally invasive procedures are the method of choice, especially since many ureteral injuries are diagnosed late after the traumatic event. Percutaneous or nephrostomy tube drainage of urinomas can be successful, as well as internal stenting of ureteral injuries [1504]. If endoscopic management is not possible, primary repair of partial lacerations should be followed by internal stenting. The management of complete lacerations, avulsions or crush injuries depends on the amount of ureter lost and its location. If there is an adequate healthy length of ureter, a primary ureteroureterostomy can be performed. If primary re-anastomosis is not achievable, distal ureteral injuries can be managed using a psoas bladder hitch, Boari flap or even nephropexy. Proximal injuries can be managed using transureteroureterostomy, auto-transplantation or ureteral replacement with bowel or appendix [1505]. 3.22.2.3. Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of paediatric ureteral trauma RecommendationsStrength ratingDiagnose suspected ureteral injuries by retrograde pyelogram.StrongManage ureteral injuries endoscopically, using internal stenting or drainage of an urinoma, either percutaneously or via a nephrostomy tube.Weak 