6.3.1. Treatment of low-risk disease. 6.3.1.1. Active surveillance The main risk for men with low-risk disease is over-treatment (see sections 6.1.1, 6.2.1); AS should therefore be considered SOC for all such patients with a life expectancy > ten years based on comorbidities and age) and where curative treatment would be considered in the case of disease progression. 6.3.1.1.1. Active surveillance - inclusion criteria Guidance regarding selection criteria for AS is limited by the lack of data from prospective RCTs. As a consequence, the Panel undertook an international collaborative study involving healthcare practitioners and patients to develop consensus statements for deferred treatment with curative intent for localised PCa, covering all domains of AS (DETECTIVE Study) [330], as well as a formal SR on the various AS protocols [491]. The criteria most often published include: ISUP grade group 1, clinical stage cT1c or cT2a, PSA < 10 ng/mL and PSA-D < 0.15 ng/mL/cc, as based on systematic biopsy schemes [487,492]. The latter threshold remains controversial [492,493]. These criteria were supported by the DETECTIVE study consensus. There was no agreement on the maximum number of systematic cores that can be involved with cancer or the maximum percentage core involvement (CI), although there was recognition that extensive disease on MRI should exclude men from AS, even though there is no firm definition on this, especially when targeted biopsies confirm ISUP grade group 1 [330]. A SR and meta-analysis found three clinico-pathological variables which were significantly associated with reclassification, high PSA-D, > 2 positive cores (on systematic biopsies) and African-American descent [495]. In addition, a previous pathology consensus group suggested excluding men from AS when any of the following features were present: predominant ductal carcinoma (including pure IDC), cribriform histology, sarcomatoid carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, EPE or LVI in needle biopsy [497] and perineural invasion [498]. A multi-disciplinary consensus conference on germline testing attempted to develop a genetic implementation framework for the management of PCa [154]. Based on consensus, BRCA2-gene testing was recommended for AS discussions and could be performed in men with family history of prostate, breast or ovarian cancers. However, the nature of such discussions and how a positive result influences management were beyond the scope of the project. Currently, BRCA2 mutation does not exclude a patient from AS if tumour factors are otherwise favourable. Furthermore, if included in AS programmes, patients with a known BRCA2 mutation should be cautiously monitored until such time that more robust data are available. 6.3.1.1.2. Tissue-based prognostic biomarker testing for selection for active surveillance Biomarkers, including Oncotype Dx®, Prolaris®, Decipher®, PORTOS and ProMark® are promising (see Section 5.2.8.3). However, further data will be needed before such markers can be used in standard clinical practice [220]. 6.3.1.1.3. Magnetic resonance imaging for selection for active surveillance In men eligible for AS based upon systematic biopsy findings alone who did not have a pre-biopsy MRI, a re-biopsy within 6–12 months (usually referred to as ‘confirmatory biopsy’) seems mandatory to exclude sampling error. A large body of literature including two RCTs showed that adding MRI-targeted biopsy to systematic sampling at confirmatory biopsy improved detection of ISUP grade ≥ 2 cancers and thus, patient selection for AS [121,499,500,502-504]. Adding MRI-targeted biopsy to systematic sampling at confirmatory biopsy improved upgrade detection by increments of 0-7.9 per 100 men depending on the series [499]. In a meta-analysis of 6 studies, the rate of upgrading to ISUP grade group ≥ 2 cancer increased from 20% (95% CI: 16–25%) to 27% (95% CI: 22–34%) when MRI-targeted biopsy was added to systematic biopsy [504]. The Active Surveillance MRI Study (ASIST) randomised men on AS scheduled for confirmatory biopsy to either 12-core systematic biopsy or to MRI with targeted biopsy (when indicated), combined with systematic biopsy (up to 12 cores in total). After two yearsof follow-up, use of MRI before confirmatory biopsy resulted in fewer failures of surveillance (19% vs. 35%, p = 0.017) and in fewer patients progressing to ISUP grade group ≥ 2 cancer (9.9% vs. 23%, p = 0.048) [502]. However, systematic biopsy retains its additional value, which argues for a combined biopsy approach [499,504]. The DETECTIVE study agreed that men eligible for AS after combined systematic- and MRI-targeted biopsy do not require a confirmatory biopsy [330]. If the PCa diagnosis is made on MRI-targeted biopsy alone (recommended in some countries national guidelines, e.g., the Nordic countries [762] in order to lower the risk of over-detection of insignificant tumours, a confirmative systematic biopsy should be performed before definite decision of AS to rule out more widespread cancer growth in the prostate. 6.3.1.1.4. Follow-up during active surveillance Based on the DETECTIVE consensus study, the follow-up strategy should be based on serial DRE (at least once yearly), PSA (at least once, every six months) and repeated biopsy. It was also agreed that PSA progression or change in PSA kinetics alone should lead to reclassification only if accompanied by changes in histology on repeat biopsy [330]. Yerram et al., analysed a prospectively-maintained AS cohort of 369 patients (272 with ISUP grade group 1 cancer and 97 with ISUP grade group 2 cancer) who had been selected for AS after combined systematic and MRI-targeted sampling during confirmatory biopy. At two years, systematic biopsy, MRI-targeted biopsy and combined biopsy detected grade progression in 44 patients (15.9%), 73 patients (26.4%) and 90 patients (32.5%), respectively. This suggests that both biopsy approaches retain added value, not only for confirmatory biopsy, but also during AS [763]. In 2016, the Prostate Cancer Radiological Estimation of Change in Sequential Evaluation (PRECISE) criteria were established to standardise the assessment of tumour progression on serial MRI [507]. Progression on MRI, defined using the PRECISE criteria, or not, is a strong predictor of histological upgrading [508,509]. Two independent meta-analyses assessed the value of MRI progression criteria for predicting histological progression (mostly defined as progression to ISUP grade group ≥ 2). The pooled histological progression rate was 27% in both reviews. If biopsies were triggered only by MRI progression findings, approximately two thirds of the biopsies would be avoided, at the cost of missing 40% of men with histological progression. In addition, at least half of biopsied men would have had negative findings for histological progression and thus would have undergone unnecessary biopsies. If histological progression was restricted to progression to ISUP grade group > 3, approximately 30% of histological progression would be missed and approximately 80% of the biopsies performed would be unnecessary. The use of the PRECISE criteria did not seem to change these results [510,511]. This supports maintaining protocol-mandated follow-up biopsies during the course of AS. However, several factors have been found to be associated with low re-classification rates and long PFS; negative baseline or follow-up MRI [505,512-518], low PSA-D [505,513,515,518], low PSA velocity [519,520] or negative biopsy (i.e., no cancer at all) at confirmatory or follow-up biopsy [521]. In patients with stable (PRECISE 3) follow-up MRI, a low PSA-D may be associated with a low rate of progression [522]. Using these criteria, it might be possible, in the future, to create risk-based personalised AS biopsy schedules. A Panel SR incorporating 263 surveillance protocols showed that 78.7% of protocols mandated per-protocol confirmatory biopsies within the first two yearsand that 57.7% of the protocols performed repeat biopsy at least every three years for ten years after the start of AS [491]. In another review it was concluded that a negative follow-up biopsy was associated with a 50% decrease in the risk of future reclassification and upgrading [523]. In a single-centre AS cohort of 514 patients who underwent at least three protocol-mandated biopsies after diagnosis (the confirmatory biopsy and at least two additional surveillance biopsies), men with one negative biopsy (i.e., no cancer at all) at confirmatory or second biopsy, or men with two consecutive negative biopsies had a lower likelihood of a positive third biopsy and significantly better 10-year treatmentfree survival [521]. This suggests that men with repetitive negative biopsies may pursue AS with at least less frequent untriggered biopsies. 6.3.1.1.5. Active Surveillance - change in treatment Men may remain on AS whilst they continue to consent, have a life expectancy of > ten years and the disease remains indolent. Patient anxiety about continued surveillance occurs in around 10% of patients on AS [524] and was recognised as a valid reason for active treatment [330]. A thorough discussion on pros/cons of AS vs. active treatment already at the time of diagnosis is therefore of outmost importance. More common is the development of other comorbidities which may result in a decision to transfer to a WW strategy. A PSA change alone (including PSA-DT < 3 years) should not change management based on its weak link with grade progression [527,528] but rather trigger further investigation. There was clear agreement in the DETECTIVE consensus meeting that a change in PSA should lead to repeat-MRI and repeat-biopsy. It was also agreed that changes on follow-up MRI needed a confirmatory biopsy before considering active treatment [330]. However, the histopathology criteria required to trigger a change in management in the targeted biopsy era remain debated. Magnetic resonance imaging-targeted biopsy induces a grade shift and ISUP grade group 2–3 cancers detected by MRI-targeted biopsy have, on average, a better prognosis than those detected by systematic sampling (see Section 5.2.4.2.6.4). As an increasing number of men with favourable intermediate-risk disease are managed with AS (see section 6.2.2.1), it seems illogical to use progression to ISUP grade group 2 based on targeted biopsies as the sole criterion for reclassification. In addition, as acknowledged in the DETECTIVE consensus meeting, the number of positive cores is not an indicator of tumour volume anymore if targeted biopsies are performed [330,529]. No agreement could be reached on the pathological criteria required to trigger a change in management during the DETECTIVE consensus meeting [330]. However, based on the findings of a SR incorporating 271 reclassification protocols, patients with low-volume ISUP grade group 2 disease at recruitment, and with increased systematic core positivity (> 3 cores involvement [> 50% per core]) on repeat systematic biopsies not using MRI, should be reclassified [491]. 6.3.1.2. Alternatives to active surveillance For patients with a life expectancy of < ten years (based on comorbidities and age), where curative treatment would not be an option in the case of progression, WW is SOC rather than AS. In terms of alternatives to AS in the management of patients with low-risk disease there is some data from randomised studies. In the PIVOT trial (Section 6.1.1) which compared surgery vs. observation, only 42% of patients had low-risk disease [482]. Sub-group analysis revealed that for low-risk disease there was no statistically significant difference in all-cause mortality between surgery vs. observation (RR: 0.93, 95% CI: 0.78–1.11). In the ProtecT study (Section 6.1.1) which compared the less organised strategy of “active monitoring” (i.e. repeat PSA management only) vs. surgery vs. EBRT, 66% of patients had a D’Amico low-risk disease [474]. The study found, after 15 years follow-up, no difference between the three arms in terms of OS and CSS, but AM had higher metastatic progression (9.4%) compared with surgery (4.7%) or EBRT (5.0%). There are no robust data comparing contemporary AS protocols with either surgery or EBRT in patients with low-risk disease. Active surveillance should be considered SOC in patients with low- to intermediate risk disease and a life expectancy > ten years. Surgery and EBRT should only be considered as alternatives to AS in patients suitable for such treatments after thorough information on pros and cons of AS and active treatment, and who after such information refuse or for some other reason are deemed unfit for AS, and who accept a trade-off between toxicity and prevention of disease progression. Other treatments such as whole-gland ablative therapy (e.g. cryotherapy or HIFU) or focal ablative therapy remain unproven in the setting of localised low-risk disease compared with AS or radical treatment options and should not be used outside a trial setting or well-designed prospective cohort setting. These treatments are discussed in detail in Section 6.1.5. 6.3.1.2.1. Androgen deprivation monotherapy Data regarding the use of ADT monotherapy in men with low-risk localised disease may be inferred indirectly from the Early Prostate Cancer (EPC) Trial Programme which published its findings in 2006 [764]. The EPC programme comprises three large RCTs including 8,113 men with localised (cT1–2, N0/NxM0) or locally advanced (cT3–4, any N; or any T, N+, M0) PCa. The intervention was oral bicalutamide 150 mg monotherapy vs. placebo following standard care (defined as RP, radical EBRT or WW). The primary endpoints were PFS and OS. Patients were stratified according to clinical stage only; data regarding PSA and GS were not assessed. The authors found in patients with localised disease, ADT monotherapy did not improve PFS nor OS in any of the subgroups, compared with placebo. Instead, there was a statistically insignificant numerical trend towards worse OS with ADT in the WW sub-group (HR: 1.16, 95% CI: 0.99–1.37; p = 0.07). Although the trial did not directly address men with low-risk disease, it offered some evidence suggesting that otherwise asymptomatic men with localised disease should not receive ADT monotherapy. A phase 2 RCT addressed a similar approach, where patients were randomised to enzalutamide plus AS or AS alone. This study indicated that PSA progression could be delayed, and the odds of a negative biopsy increased during the median follow-up time of 1.3 years, but patients had more side effects of the treatment without showing any long-term benefits of the treatment [765]. Hence, there is no evidence supporting the use of any hormonal treatment in asymptomatic men with low-risk disease who are not eligible for any local/radical treatment; these men should simply be offered AS or WW alone. 6.3.1.3. Summary of evidence and guidelines for the management of low-risk disease* Summary of evidenceLEWW or AS is SOC, based on life expectancy.2aAll active treatment options present a risk of over-treatment.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingWatchful WaitingManage patients with a life expectancy < ten years by watchful waiting.StrongActive surveillance (AS)Manage patients with a life expectancy > ten years and low-risk disease by AS.StrongSelection of patientsPatients with cribriform or intraductal histology on biopsy should be excluded from AS.StrongPerform magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) before a confirmatory biopsy if no MRI has been performed before the initial biopsy.StrongTake both targeted biopsy (of any PI-RADS ≥ 3 lesion) and systematic biopsy if a confirmatory biopsy is performed.StrongIf MRI is not available, per-protocol confirmatory prostate biopsies should be performed.WeakIf a patient has had upfront MRI followed by systematic and targeted biopsies there is no need for confirmatory biopsies.WeakStrategy of surveillanceRepeat biopsies should be performed at least once every three years for ten years.WeakIn case of prostate-specific antigen progression or change in digital-rectal exam-ination or MRI findings, do not progress to active treatment without a repeat biopsy.Strong 