3.2. Patient questionnaires. This section includes symptom scores, symptom questionnaires/scales/indices, patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) and health-related quality of life (HRQoL) measures. The latter include generic or condition-specific measures. Questionnaires should have been validated for the language in which they are being used, and, if used for outcome evaluation, should have been shown to be sensitive to change. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) published guidance for industry on PROM instruments (questionnaires) in 2009 [20]. Although many studies have investigated the validity and reliability of urinary symptom questionnaires and PROMs, most of these studies included mixed populations (men and women). This limits the extent to which results and conclusions from these studies can be applied to particular LUT syndromes in women. Some questionnaires (ICIQ-FLUTS, QUID, 3IQ, ICIQ-SF) have potential to discriminate UI types in women [21-23]. Others have been developed to measure symptoms and bother in OAB (OABQ-SF, B-SAQ) and other specific conditions. A newly developed patient assessment tool, the OAB- Bladder Assessment Tool (OAB-BAT), was found to be a valid and reliable OAB PROM that includes symptoms, bother, impacts and satisfaction with treatment [24]. A systematic review included 22 studies that assessed eleven case-finding tools for OAB. All tools were found to have good sensitivity and specificity for OAB or incontinence symptoms. The B-SAQ was the only tool in this SR to include screening for “red- flag” symptoms such as haematuria and pain, and it has also been validated in a primary care setting [25]. Some questionnaires are responsive to change and may be used to measure outcomes, although evidence for this is inconsistent [26,27]. A SR including 73 studies assessed 27 specific and six generic instruments that measure quality of life (QoL) in women with UI. In this review, the incontinence questionnaire (IQoL) was found to be the most psychometrically robust disease-specific tool for use in English-speaking women with UI. It had the highest level of evidence for sufficient internal consistency, test-retest reliability, measurement error and hypothesis testing for construct validity. It is also the most translated instrument. Evidence on the performance of generic QoL tools for this population is limited [28]. There is no evidence to indicate whether use of QoL or condition-specific questionnaires has an impact on outcome of treatment. Detailed description of the different urinary symptoms questionnaires and PROMs is beyond the scope of these guidelines. For more information, we recommend the 6th ICI review on PROM assessment [29]. To date, there is not one questionnaire that fulfils all requirements for assessment of women with LUTS. Clinicians must evaluate the tools that exist, for use alone or in combination, for assessment and monitoring of treatment outcome [30]. The questionnaires can be found on the following websites: www.iciq.net, https://eprovide.mapi-trust.org, www.pfizerpcoa.com, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. 3.2.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for patient questionnaires Summary of evidenceLEValidated condition-specific symptom scores assist in the screening for and categorisation of LUTS.3Validated symptom scores measure the severity of UI and LUTS.3Both condition-specific and general health status questionnaires measure current health status and change following treatment.3Patient questionnaires cannot replace a detailed patient consultation and should only be used as part of a complete medical history.4 RecommendationStrength ratingUse a validated and appropriate questionnaire as part of the standardised initial assessment and follow-up of female LUTS.Strong 