3.3. Bladder diaries. Measurement of the frequency and severity of LUTS is an important step in the evaluation and management of LUT dysfunction. Bladder diaries are a semi-objective method of quantifying symptoms, such as frequency of UI events, number of nocturia episodes, etc. They also quantify urodynamic variables, such as voided volume, 24-hour urine volume or nocturnal total urine volume. Discrepancy between diary recordings and the patient rating of symptoms, e.g., frequency of UI, can be useful for patient counselling. Fluid intake and voided volume measurement can be used to support diagnoses and management planning, for example in OAB, and for identifying 24-hour or nocturnal polyuria. Diaries can also be used to monitor treatment response and are widely used in clinical trials. In patients with severe UI, a bladder diary is unlikely to accurately report 24-hour urine output. Consensus terminology is now well-defined and widely accepted [1,31]. However, the terms micturition diary, frequency/volume chart, bladder diary and voiding diary, have been used interchangeably for many years, but only bladder diaries include information on fluid intake, times of voiding, voided volumes, UI episodes, pad usage, degree of urgency and severity of UI recorded for at least 24 hours. When reviewing the evidence, all synonymous search terms have been included. Two studies have demonstrated the reproducibility of diaries in both men and women [32,33]. Other studies have shown the feasibility, reliability, and validity of the bladder diary [34,35]. Further studies have demonstrated variability of diary data within a 24-hour period and compared voided volumes recorded in diaries with those recorded by uroflowmetry [36,37]. Another study found that keeping a bladder diary had a therapeutic benefit [38]. A number of observational studies have demonstrated a close correlation between data obtained from bladder diaries and standard symptom evaluation [39-42]. The optimum number of days required for bladder diaries appears to be based on a balance between accuracy and compliance [43,44]. Diary durations between three and seven days are routinely reported in the literature. 3.3.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for bladder diaries Summary of evidenceLEBladder diaries of three to seven days duration are reliable tools for objective measurement of mean voided volume, day- and night-time frequency, urgency episodes, UI episode frequency fluid intake and pad usage.2bBladder diaries are sensitive to change and are a reliable outcome measure.2b RecommendationsStrength ratingAsk patients with LUTS to complete a bladder diary as part of the standardised assessment of female LUTS.StrongUse a bladder diary with a duration of > 3 days.Strong 