3.5. Post-void residual volume. Post-void residual (PVR) volume is the amount of urine that remains in the bladder after voiding. It is a measure of voiding efficiency, and results from a number of contributing factors. The detection of significant PVR volume is important because it may worsen symptoms and, may be associated with UTI, upper urinary tract (UUT) dilatation and renal insufficiency. Both bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) and/or detrusor underactivity (DU) can potentially contribute to the development of significant PVR volume. Post-void residual volume can be measured by catheterisation or ultrasound (US). Most studies investigating PVR volume have assessed mixed populations including those with neurogenic UI, so results should be applied with caution to women with non-neurogenic LUTS. Studies investigating the best method of measuring PVR volume [48-53] conclude that US measurement of PVR volume is preferable to catheterisation due to its favourable risk–benefit profile. The prevalence of significant PVR volume among patients with LUTS is uncertain, partly because of the lack of a standard definition of an abnormal PVR volume. Some authors have suggested that it is reasonable to consider a PVR volume > 100 mL to be significant, although many women may remain asymptomatic and hence it is imperative to consider the clinical context. There is no consensus on what constitutes a significant PVR volume in women [54-59], therefore the Panel prefers the use of bladder voiding efficiency (BVE) - the proportion of the total bladder volume that is voided by the patient. Bladder voiding efficiency can be calculated as a percentage: BVE = voided volume (VV)/(VV+PVR) × 100. This may be a more reliable parameter to evaluate poor voiding [46]. 3.5.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for post-void residual volume Summary of evidenceLEWomen with lower urinary tract symptoms exhibit a higher PVR volume compared to asymptomatic women.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingMeasure post-void residual (PVR) volume in patients with LUTS during initial assessment.StrongUse ultrasound to measure PVR volume.StrongMonitor PVR volume in patients receiving treatments that may cause or worsen voiding dysfunction.StrongProvide bladder voiding efficiency as an additional parameter when measuring PVR volume.Weak 