3.6. Urodynamics. Urodynamic testing is widely used as an adjunct to clinical diagnosis, in the belief that it may help to provide or confirm diagnosis, predict treatment outcome, or facilitate discussion during counselling. The simplest form of urodynamic evaluation is uroflowmetry. The maximum flow rate (Qmax), the volume voided and the shape of the curve in addition to the PVR volume (see above) are the most important parameters to be assessed [29]. The bladder should be sufficiently full because of the volume dependency of Qmax [60,61]. A minimum voided volume of 150 mL is advised in men, but there is little evidence to suggest a volume threshold in women. It is relevant to ask the patient whether or not the voiding is representative. Invasive urodynamic tests are sometimes performed prior to invasive treatment of LUTS. These tests include multichannel cystometry and pressure–flow studies, ambulatory monitoring and video-urodynamics, and different tests of urethral function, such as urethral pressure profilometry. The International Continence Society (ICS) and the United Kingdom Continence Society (UKCS) provide standards to optimise urodynamic test performance and reporting [62,63]. A characteristic of a good urodynamic study is that the patient’s symptoms are replicated, recordings are checked for quality control, and results interpreted in the context of the clinical problem, remembering that there may be physiological variability within the same individual [62]. Non-invasive alternatives for measurement of detrusor pressure and BOO include transabdominal wall near-infrared spectroscopy and US detrusor wall thickness analysis, but as yet, these techniques have not been adopted into routine clinical practice [29]. Further condition-specific information regarding the role of urodynamic testing in OAB, SUI, BOO and UAB can be found in respective sections of these guidelines. 3.6.1. Variability In common with most physiological tests there is variability in urodynamic results. This has consequences for the reproducibility, diagnostic accuracy, and predictive value of urodynamic testing. ICS Good Urodynamic Practice Guidelines state [62] that, at least in the case of cystometry and pressure–flow studies, one set of measurements suffices, but only if the patient’s symptoms have been replicated but some studies contradict this [64,65]. There is also conflicting evidence about the reproducibility of maximum urethral closure pressure (MUCP) measurement [64,65]. Valsalva leak point pressure (VLPP) measurement is not standardised and there is minimal evidence about its reproducibility. No studies on the reproducibility of ambulatory monitoring in non-neurological patients have been published [29]. 3.6.2. Diagnostic accuracy Clinical diagnosis and cystometric findings sometimes do not correlate [66,67] and asymptomatic women may have abnormalities on urodynamic testing. The diagnostic accuracy of urethral pressure profilometry [68] and urethral retro-resistance pressure measurement in SUI is poor [29]. Valsalva leak point pressure did not reliably assess UI severity in a cohort of women selected for surgical treatment of SUI [69]. Urethral pressure reflectometry may have greater diagnostic accuracy but its clinical role remains unclear [70]. Ambulatory urodynamics may detect unexpected physiological variance from normal more often than conventional cystometry does, but the clinical relevance of this is also uncertain [71,72]. A pressure–flow study, that is, the simultaneous measurement of flow rate and detrusor pressure during voiding, can reveal whether a poor flow rate and PVR volume are due to BOO, DU or a combination of both. Also, it may provide information on the degree of pelvic floor relaxation and thus diagnose dysfunctional voiding. Several proposals to define BOO in women have been made. These definitions are based on detrusor pressure, either PdetQmax or the maximum value Pdet.max, and the Qmax value, either during the pressure-flow study or during uroflowmetry. These measures are sometimes combined with the findings during fluoroscopic imaging (see Section 4.5.4.8) [73,74]. Unlike the situation in men, there is no widely accepted threshold for BOO diagnosis in women. Bladder contraction strength parameters are derived from detrusor pressure and flow rate during a pressure-flow study or from stop tests [74], but again, validation is poor. Although these parameters estimate the strength of the contraction, they ignore its speed and persistence (see Section 4.4.3.2) [75]. A video-urodynamic study can be useful to detect the site of obstructed voiding, which may be anatomical or functional [76]. Also, video-urodynamics may detect bladder diverticulum or gross reflux as a pressure-absorbing reservoir. 3.6.3. Predictive value Performing urodynamic evaluation is only useful if it leads to more effective clinical care and better outcomes. A Cochrane review of eight randomised controlled trials (RCTs) showed that use of urodynamic tests in women with UI increased the likelihood of prescribing drugs but did not increase the likelihood of undergoing surgery. However, there was no evidence that this altered the clinical outcome [77]. Most RCTs addressed the utility of urodynamic tests on SUI only, including women with uncomplicated SUI. A meta-analysis including four RCTs comparing surgical outcomes in women with self-reported SUI (or stress-predominant MUI) who were investigated via urodynamics with women who had office evaluation only, found that there was no difference in cure and complication rates [78]. In contrast, a large retrospective multicentre study found that only 36% of patients were defined as uncomplicated according to the definitions used in large RCTs [79]. The urodynamic observations were not consistent with the pre-urodynamic diagnosis in 1,276 out of 2,053 patients (62.2%). Voiding dysfunctions were urodynamically diagnosed in 394 patients (19.2%) and planned surgery was cancelled or modified in 304 of 1,582 patients (19.2%) in whom data were available, due to the urodynamic findings [80]. A large UK multi-centre RCT is underway designed to evaluate the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of invasive urodynamic investigations in management of women with refractory OAB symptoms [81]. The predictive value of urethral function tests remains unclear. In observational studies, there was no consistent correlation between the results of these tests and subsequent success or failure of SUI surgery [40-42,82]. The same was true in a secondary analysis of an RCT [83]. The presence of preoperative detrusor overactivity (DO) in women with stress-predominant MUI has been associated with postoperative UUI but did not predict overall treatment failure following mid-urethral sling (MUS) surgery or colposuspension [83]. The urodynamic diagnosis of DO has no predictive value for treatment response in studies on antimuscarinics, onabotulinumtoxinA and sacral nerve stimulation (SNS) in patients with OAB symptoms [84,85]. Augmentation cystoplasty aims to abolish DO, improve bladder compliance, and increase functional bladder capacity but there is no evidence to guide whether or not preoperative urodynamics are predictive of outcome. Most clinicians would, however, consider preoperative urodynamics as essential prior to contemplating augmentation cystoplasty. A pressure–flow study is capable of discriminating BOO from DU as a cause of voiding dysfunction. The predictive value of parameters derived from such a study for voiding dysfunction after a surgical procedure for SUI is, however, low. A low preoperative flow rate and a low detrusor voiding pressure have been shown to correlate with voiding dysfunction after a tension-free vaginal tape (TVT) and an autologous fascial sling procedure, respectively [86-88]. Bladder contraction strength parameters combining flow rate and detrusor pressure only poorly predicted voiding dysfunction after autologous fascial sling [89]. Post-hoc analysis of two high-quality surgical trials of TVT, Burch colposuspension and autologous fascial sling showed that no preoperative urodynamic parameter predicted postoperative voiding dysfunction in a selected population of women with low preoperative PVR volume [90,91]. The Panel recognises that it may be valuable to use urodynamic test results to select the optimum management strategy; however, there is inconsistent evidence regarding the predictive value of such tests. When urodynamics and clinical assessment (i.e., by history and examination) are in disagreement, there needs to be a careful re-evaluation of the clinical symptoms and investigation results to ensure that the diagnosis is correct before invasive treatments are contemplated. Expert opinion recognises urodynamic testing as the most comprehensive analysis of LUT function and the primary aim of urodynamics includes reproduction of the patient’s symptoms. The information one obtains from urodynamics may be very valuable to discuss and manage expectation regarding invasive treatment. 3.6.4. Summary of evidence and recommendations for urodynamics Summary of evidenceLEUrodynamics provide comprehensive analysis of LUT function underlying different clinical conditions.4Most urodynamic parameters show variability within the same session and over time.3Different techniques of measuring urethral function may have good test–retest reliability, but do not consistently correlate to other urodynamic tests or to the severity of UI.3There may be inconsistency between history and urodynamic results.3Urodynamic diagnosis of DO does not influence treatment outcomes in patients with OAB.1aPreoperative urodynamics in women with uncomplicated, clinically demonstrable SUI does not improve the outcome of surgery for SUI.1bThere is no consistent correlation between the results of urethral function tests and subsequent success or failure of SUI surgery.3There is no consistent evidence that preoperative DO is associated with surgical failure of MUS in women.3The presence of preoperative DO may be associated with persistence of urgency postoperatively in women undergoing surgery for SUI.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingAdhere to good urodynamic practice standards as described by the International Continence Society when performing urodynamics in patients with LUTS.StrongDo not routinely carry out urodynamics when offering treatment for uncomplicated stress urinary incontinence.StrongDo not routinely carry out urodynamics when offering first-line treatment to patients with uncomplicated overactive bladder symptoms.StrongPerform urodynamics if the findings may change the choice of invasive treatment.WeakDo not use urethral pressure profilometry or leak point pressure to grade severity of urinary incontinence.Strong 