3.8. Imaging. In clinical practice, imaging is used to understand the relationship between anatomy and function. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have largely replaced X-ray imaging in the evaluation of the pelvic floor. Ultrasound is sometimes preferred to MRI because of its ability to produce three-dimensional (3D) and 4D (dynamic) images at lower cost and wider availability. There is no need for UUT imaging unless a high-pressure bladder, severe POP or chronic urinary retention is suspected or diagnosed, or abnormal renal function tests are observed. In cases of suspected UI caused by an UUT anomaly or uretero-vaginal fistula, UUT imaging (urography, computed tomography [CT]) may be indicated [101]. 3.8.1. Ultrasound Ultrasonography of the LUT plays a role in the differential diagnosis of women with LUTS and in cases presenting with haematuria. Ultrasonography has been used in the evaluation of UI and pelvic floor since the 1980s. Different imaging approaches, such as abdominal, transvaginal, transrectal, perineal and transurethral are described. The bladder neck and urethra are easily visible, and measurements can be done at rest and during straining, coughing and pelvic floor contraction. The parameters assessed in the diagnosis of SUI, for example, include bladder neck mobility or descent, urethro-vesical angle, and urethral rotation [102,103]. Ultrasonography can be used to assess PFMs and their function. Contraction of PFM results in displacement of pelvic structures that can easily be imaged on US. Integrity of the levator ani muscle can be determined by 3D transperineal US. Ultrasound may also provide information on the anatomical changes of the LUT and pelvic floor associated with persistence of symptoms post-treatment [104]. The specific role of US is discussed in the condition-specific sections of these guidelines where applicable. 3.8.2. Detrusor wall thickness As OAB syndrome is linked to DO, it has been hypothesised that frequent detrusor contractions may increase detrusor/bladder wall thickness (DWT/BWT). No consensus exists as to the relationship between OAB and increased BWT/DWT [105], and there is no evidence that BWT/DWT imaging improves management of OAB. There is no widely accepted standardised bladder volume for bladder wall thickness measurement. In a retrospective study including 227 women with symptoms of voiding difficulty (hesitancy, intermittency, and poor stream), 74 (32.6%) were diagnosed with voiding dysfunction on the basis of free uroflowmetry and residual urine. While controlling for the effect of DO, the relationships between DWT and different parameters of voiding function in pressure–flow studies and free uroflowmetry were examined. The results indicated that DWT was not associated with any urodynamic parameters that may indicate BOO [106]. 3.8.3. Magnetic resonance imaging There is a general consensus that MRI provides good global pelvic floor assessment, including POP, defecatory function and integrity of the pelvic floor support [107]. However, there is a large variation in MRI interpretation between observers [108] and little evidence to support its clinical usefulness in the management of LUTS/UI. There is no conclusive evidence that MRI evaluation of POP is more clinically useful than vaginal examination. Studies have assessed the use of imaging to assess the mechanism of MUS insertion for SUI. One study suggested that MUS placement decreased mobility of the mid-urethra but not of the bladder neck [109]. Following MUS, a wider gap between pubic symphysis and sling (assessed by imaging) has been shown to correlate with a lower chance of cure of SUI [110]. 3.8.3.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for imaging Summary of evidenceLEThere is no consistent evidence that routine urinary tract imaging is useful in the evaluation or management of LUTS.3There is no consistent evidence that BWT/DWT measurement is useful in the management of OAB.3 RecommendationStrength ratingDo not routinely carry out imaging of the upper urinary tract or lower urinary tract as part of the assessment of LUTS.Strong 