3.9. Urinary biomarkers and microbiome. Interest in the role of urinary biomarkers for the diagnosis of LUT dysfunction has increased in recent years. Nerve growth factor (NGF), brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), prostaglandin E2, adenosin triphosphate (ATP) and purinergic receptors (P2X) in bladder tissue have been studied as biomarkers for OAB. Serum beta natriuretic peptide (BNP), urinary 6-sulfaoxymelatonin and C-reactive protein (CRP), melatonin, vasopressin levels have been studied in relation to nocturia. For SUI, urinary IL 12-70, urinary (uNGF) N-telopeptide of type I collagen (NTx) and urinary microbiota have been studied. Currently, studies investigating urinary biomarkers are methodologically limited often due to failing to control for confounding variables and results are conflicting [111]. Another area of discovery is the role of urinary microbiota in identifying and differentiating various types of UI and other LUT disease in women. A SR described studies showing differences in the types and relative proportions of bacteria such as Lactobacillus, Gardnerella, and Atopobium vaginae, among women with different types of UI compared with healthy controls. Urinary microbiota has also been shown to differ depending on women’s response to anticholinergic treatment response [112]. Further research is needed before the place of urine microbiota assessment in the clinical pathway for women with LUTS is fully defined. Further information on the diagnostic efficacy of biomarkers in OAB can be found in Section 4.1.3. 3.9.1. Summary of evidence and recommendation for urinary biomarkers Summary of evidenceLEThere is insufficient evidence on the diagnostic accuracy and validity of urinary biomarkers for LUT disease in women.3Differences in the urinary microbiota have been found to be associated with different types of LUT dysfunction in women, including UI, and with different responses to treatment.3 RecommendationStrength ratingDo not routinely use urinary biomarkers or estimation of the urinary microbiota in the diagnosis and management of LUT disease in women.Strong 