5.5.3. Treatment for Nocturia. 5.5.3.1. Antidiuretic therapy The antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP) plays a key role in body water homeostasis and control of urine production by binding to V2 receptors in the renal collecting ducts. Arginine vasopressin increases water re-absorption and urinary osmolality, so decreasing water excretion and total urine volume. Arginine vasopressin also has V1 receptor mediated vasoconstrictive/hypertensive effects and a very short serum half-life, which makes the hormone unsuitable for treating nocturia/nocturnal polyuria. Desmopressin is a synthetic analogue of AVP with high V2 receptor affinity and no relevant V1 receptor affinity. It has been investigated for treating nocturia [569], with specific doses, titrated dosing, differing formulations, and options for route of administration. Most studies have short follow-up. Global interpretation of existing studies is difficult due to the limitations, imprecision, heterogeneity and inconsistencies of the studies. A SR of randomised or quasi-randomised trials in men with nocturia found that desmopressin may decrease the number of nocturnal voids by -0.46 compared to placebo over short-term follow-up (up to three months); over intermediate-term follow-up (three to twelve months) there was a change of -0.85 in nocturnal voids in a substantial number of participants without increase in major adverse events [570]. Another SR of comparative trials of men with nocturia as the primary presentation and LUTS including nocturia or nocturnal polyuria found that antidiuretic therapy using dose titration was more effective than placebo in relation to nocturnal voiding frequency and duration of undisturbed sleep [566]. Adverse events include headache, hyponatremia, insomnia, dry mouth, hypertension, abdominal pain, peripheral edema, and nausea. Three studies evaluating titrated-dose desmopressin in which men were included, reported seven serious adverse events in 530 patients (1.3%), with one death. There were seventeen cases of hyponatraemia (3.2%) and seven of hypertension (1.3%). Headache was reported in 53 (10%) and nausea in fifteen (2.8%) [566]. Hyponatremia is the most important concern, especially in patients > 65 years of age, with potential life-threatening consequences. Baseline values of sodium over 130 mmol/L have been used as inclusion criteria in some research protocols. Assessment of sodium levels must be undertaken at baseline, after initiation of treatment or dose titration and during treatment. Desmopressin is not recommended in high-risk groups [566]. Desmopressin oral disintegrating tablets (ODT) have been studied separately in the sex-specific pivotal trials CS41 and CS40 in patients with nocturia [571,572]. Almost 87% of included patients had nocturnal polyuria and approximately 48% of the patients were > 65 years. The co-primary endpoints in both trials were change in number of nocturia episodes per night from baseline and at least a 33% decrease in the mean number of nocturnal voids from baseline during three months of treatment. The mean change in nocturia episodes from baseline was greater with desmopressin ODT compared to placebo (difference: women = -0.3 [95% CI: -0.5 to -0.1]; men = -0.4 [95% CI: -0.6 to -0.2]). The 33% responder rate was also greater with desmopressin ODT compared to placebo (women: 78% vs. 62%; men: 67% vs. 50%). Analysis of three published placebo-controlled trials of desmopressin ODT for nocturia showed that clinically significant hyponatraemia was more frequent in patients aged ≥ 65 years than in those aged < 65 years in all dosage groups, including those receiving the minimum effective dose for desmopressin (11% of men aged ≥ 65 years vs. 0% of men aged < 65 years receiving 50 mcg; 4% of women ≥ 65 aged years vs. 2% of women aged < 65 years receiving 25 mcg). Severe hyponatraemia, defined as ≤ 125 mmol/L serum sodium, was rare, affecting 22 of 1,431 (2%) patients overall [573]. In a cases series including men aged of more than 60 treated with 50 mcg ODT, only 12/80 men had hyponatremia (non-severe) after one week. Hyponatraemia persistence was noted in 4/12 cases after reduction to 25 mcg [574]. Low-dose desmopressin ODT has been approved in Europe, Canada and Australia for the treatment of nocturia with ≥ 2 episodes in gender-specific low doses 50 mcg for men and 25 mcg for women; however, it initially failed to receive FDA approval, with the FDA citing uncertain benefit relative to risks as the reason. Following resubmission to the FDA in June 2018 desmopressin acetate sublingual tablet, 50 mcg for men and 25 mcg for women, was approved for the treatment of nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria in adults who awaken at least two times per night to void with a boxed warning for hyponatremia. Desmopressin acetate nasal spray is a new low-dose formulation of desmopressin and differs from other types of desmopressin formulation due to its bioavailability and route of administration. Desmopressin acetate nasal spray has been investigated in two RCTs including men and women with nocturia (over two episodes per night) and a mean age of 66 years. The average benefit of treatment relative to placebo was statistically significant but low, -0.3 and -0.2 for the 1.5 mcg and 0.75 mcg doses of desmopressin acetate, respectively. The number of patients with a reduction of more than 50% of nocturia episodes was 48.5% and 37.9%, respectively compared with 30% in the placebo group [575]. The reported adverse event rate of the studies was rather low, and the risk of hyponatremia was 1.2% and 0.9% for desmopressin acetate 1.5 mcg and 0.75 mcg, respectively. Desmopressin acetate nasal spray was approved by the FDA in 2017 for the treatment of nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria, but it is not available in Europe. Practical considerations: A complete medical assessment should be made, to exclude potentially non-urological underlying causes, e.g., sleep apnoea, before prescribing desmopressin in men with nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria. The optimal dose differs between patients, in men < 65 years desmopressin treatment should be initiated at a low dose (0.1 mg/day) and may be gradually increased up to a dosage of 0.4 mg/day every week until maximum efficacy is reached. Desmopressin is taken once daily before sleeping. Patients should avoid drinking fluids at least one hour before and for eight hours after dosing. Low dose desmopressin may be prescribed in patients > 65 years. In men ≥ 65 years or older, low dose desmopressin should not be used if the serum sodium concentration is below normal: all patients should be monitored for hyponatraemia. Urologists should be cautious when prescribing low-dose desmopressin in patients under-represented in trials (e.g., patients > 75 years) who may have an increased risk of hyponatraemia. 5.5.3.2. Medications to treat LUTD Where LUTD is diagnosed and considered causative of nocturia, relevant medications for storage (and voiding) LUTS may be considered. Applicable medications include; selective α1-adrenergic antagonists [576], antimuscarinics [577-579], 5-ARIs [580] and PDE5Is [581]. However, effect size of these medications is generally small, or not significantly different from placebo when used to treat nocturia [566]. Data on OAB medications (antimuscarinics, beta-3 agonist) generally had a female-predominant population. No studies specifically addressing the impact of OAB medications on nocturia in men were identified [566]. Benefits with combination therapies were not consistently observed. 5.5.3.3. Other medications Agents to promote sleep [582], diuretics [583], non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) [584] and phytotherapy [585] were reported as being associated with response or QoL improvement [566]. Effect size of these medications in nocturia is generally small, or not significantly different from placebo. Larger responses have been reported for some medications, but larger scale confirmatory RCTs are lacking. One RCT has compared melatonin+tamsulosin compared to placebo+tamsulosin and found no difference on IPSS change [586]. Agents to promote sleep do not appear to reduce nocturnal voiding frequency but may help patients return to sleep. Summary of evidenceLENo clinical trial of pathophysiology-directed primary therapy has been undertaken.4No robust clinical trial of behavioural therapy as primary intervention has been undertaken.4Antidiuretic therapy reduces nocturnal voiding frequency in men with baseline severity of two or more voids per night.1bThere is an increased risk of hyponatremia in patients 65 years of age or older under antidiuretic therapy.1bAntidiuretic therapy increases duration of undisturbed sleep.1bAlpha 1-blocker use is associated with improvements in undisturbed sleep duration and nocturnal voiding frequency, which are generally of only marginal clinical significance.2Antimuscarinic medications can reduce night-time urinary urgency severity, but the reduction in overall nocturia frequency is small or non-significant.2Antimuscarinic medications are associated with higher incidence of dry mouth compared with placebo.25α-reductase inhibitors reduce nocturia severity in men with baseline nocturia severity of two or more voids per night.2A trial of timed diuretic therapy may be offered to men with nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria. Screening for hyponatraemia should be undertaken at baseline and during treatment.1b RecommendationsStrength ratingTreat underlying causes of nocturia, including behavioural, systemic condition(s), sleep disorders, lower urinary tract dysfunction, or a combination of factors.WeakDiscuss behavioural changes with the patient to reduce nocturnal urine volume and episodes of nocturia and improve sleep quality.WeakOffer desmopressin to decrease nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria in men < 65 years of age.WeakOffer low dose desmopressin for men > 65 years of age with nocturia at least twice per night due to nocturnal polyuria.WeakScreen for hyponatraemia at baseline, day three and day seven, one month after initiating therapy and periodically during treatment. Measure serum sodium more frequently in patients > 65 years of age and in patients at increased risk of hyponatraemia.StrongDiscuss with the patient the potential clinical benefit relative to the associated risks from the use of desmopressin, especially in men > 65 years of age.StrongOffer α1-adrenergic antagonists for treating nocturia in men who have nocturia associated with LUTS.WeakOffer antimuscarinic drugs for treating nocturia in men who have nocturia associated with overactive bladder.WeakOffer 5α-reductase inhibitors for treating nocturia in men who have nocturia associated with LUTS and an enlarged prostate (> 40 mL).WeakDo not offer phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors for the treatment of nocturia.Weak 