6.2.5. Diagnostic evaluation. Diagnosis of PE is based on the patient’s medical and sexual history [599-602]. History should classify PE as lifelong or acquired and determine whether PE is situational (under specific circumstances or with a specific partner) or consistent. Special attention should be given to the duration time of ejaculation, degree of sexual stimulus, impact on sexual activity and QoL, and drug use or abuse. It is also important to distinguish PE from ED. Many patients with ED develop secondary PE caused by the anxiety associated with difficulty in attaining and maintaining an erection [559,603]. Furthermore, some patients are unaware that loss of erection after ejaculation is normal and may erroneously complain of ED, while the actual problem is PE [594]. 6.2.5.1. Intravaginal ejaculatory latency time (IELT) Although it has been suggested as an objective diagnostic criterion and treatment outcome measure [604,605], the use of IELT alone is not sufficient to define PE, as there is significant overlap between men with and without PE [606,607]. Moreover, some men may experience PE in their non-coital sexual activities (e.g., during masturbation, oral sex or anal intercourse); thus, measuring IELT will not be suitable for their assessment. Although PE is apparently less prevalent and less bothersome among men who have sex with men (MSM) [608], many of them may also suffer from PE and IELT cannot be applied to them [609,610]. Although some studies demonstrated that MSM report longer ejaculation latency time compared to straight men [608], some others failed to demonstrate such a difference [611]. In everyday clinical practice, self-estimated IELT is sufficient [612]. Self-estimated and stopwatch-measured IELT are interchangeable and correctly assign PE status with 80% sensitivity and 80% specificity [613]. Measurement of IELT with a calibrated stopwatch is mandatory in clinical trials. For any drug treatment study of PE, Waldinger et al., suggested using geometric mean instead of arithmetic mean IELT because the distributed IELT data are skewed. Otherwise, any treatment-related ejaculation delay may be overestimated if the arithmetic mean IELT is used instead of the geometric mean IELT [614]. 6.2.5.2. Premature ejaculation assessment questionnaires The need to objectively assess PE has led to the development of several questionnaires based on using PROMs. Only two questionnaires can discriminate between patients who have PE and those who do not: Premature Ejaculation Diagnostic Tool (PEDT): A five-item questionnaire based on focus groups and interviews from the USA, Germany, and Spain assesses control, frequency, minimal stimulation, distress and interpersonal difficulty [615]. A total score of > 11 suggests a diagnosis of PE, 9 or 10 suggests a probable diagnosis, and < 8 indicates a low likelihood of PE.Arabic Index of Premature Ejaculation (AIPE): A seven-item questionnaire developed in Saudi Arabia assesses sexual desire, hard erections for sufficient intercourse, time to ejaculation, control, satisfaction of the patient and partner, and anxiety or depression [616]. A cut-off score of 30 (range 7-35) discriminates PE diagnosis best. The severity of PE is classified as severe (score: 7-13), moderate (score: 14-19), mild-to-moderate (score: 20-25) and mild (score: 26-30). Other questionnaires used to characterise PE and determine treatment effects include the Premature Ejaculation Profile (PEP) [607], Index of Premature Ejaculation (IPE) [617] and Male Sexual Health Questionnaire Ejaculatory Dysfunction (MSHQ-EjD) [618]. Currently, their role is optional in everyday clinical practice. The Masturbatory Premature Ejaculation Diagnostic Tool (MPEDT) has also been recently proposed [619], due to fact since PE patients report longer IELTs and lesser bother/distress during masturbation than partnered sex [620]; however, further validation studies are required before the routine use of this questionnaire in this population. 6.2.5.3. Physical examination and investigations Physical examination may be part of the initial assessment of men with PE. It may include a focused examination of the urological, endocrine and neurological systems to identify underlying medical conditions associated with PE or other sexual dysfunctions, such as endocrinopathy, Peyronie’s disease, urethritis or prostatitis. Laboratory or physiological testing should be directed by specific findings from history or physical examination and is not routinely recommended [601]. 6.2.5.4. Recommendations for the diagnostic evaluation of PE Summary of evidenceLEA comprehensive medical history and a thorough physical examination can serve as valuable tools for clinicians in identifying the underlying medical factors contributing to PE.3PE can negatively impact self-confidence, strain partner relationships, and potentially lead to emotional distress, anxiety, shame, and depression.2aSeveral questionnaires can be used for the diagnosis of PE (PEDT, AIPE) and for assessing the therapeutic outcomes of PE interventions (PEP).2bAlthough relying on IELT is inadequate for characterizing PE, self-reported IELT proves satisfactory in routine clinical contexts.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingPerform the diagnosis and classification of premature ejaculation (PE) based on medical and sexual history, which should include assessment of intravaginal ejaculatory latency time (IELT) (self-estimated), perceived control, distress and interpersonal difficulty due to the ejaculatory dysfunction.StrongUse patient-reported outcomes in daily clinical practice.WeakInclude physical examination in the initial assessment of PE to identify anatomical abnormalities that may be associated with PE or other sexual dysfunctions, particularly erectile dysfunction.StrongDo not perform routine laboratory or physiological tests. They should only be directed by specific findings from history or physical examination.Strong 