6.4.1. Background. Between 27% and 53% of all patients undergoing RP or RT develop a rising PSA (PSA recurrence). Whilst metastatic progression is universally preceded by rising PSA levels, physicians must inform the patient that the natural history of PSA-only recurrence may be prolonged and that a measurable PSA may not necessarily lead to clinically apparent metastatic disease. Physicians treating patients with PSA-only recurrence face a difficult set of decisions in attempting to delay the onset of metastatic disease and death while avoiding overtreating patients whose disease may never affect their OS or QoL. It should be emphasised that the treatment recommendations for these patients should be given after discussion in a multi-disciplinary team. 6.4.1.1. PSA velocity and doubling time Various PSA kinetics definitions have been proposed with different methods of calculation (log transformed or not) and eligible PSAs: PSA velocity (PSAV): absolute annual increase in serum PSA (ng/mL/year);PSA doubling time (PSA-DT): which measures the exponential increase in serum PSA over time. Prostate-specific antigen velocity is more simple to calculate by subtracting the initial value from the final value, dividing by time. However, by ignoring middle values, not all PSA values are accurately taken into account. Prostate-specific antigen-DT is calculated assuming an exponential rise in serum PSA. The formula takes into account the natural logarithm of 2 divided by the slope obtained from fitting a linear regression of the natural log of PSA over time [886]. However, many different PSA-DT calculations have been assessed according to the mathematical formula used and to the included PSA values (number, time period, intervals) [887]. For example, the ‘MSKCC’ method calculates a regression slope integrating all PSA values. Other methods transform PSA before calculating the slope and do not include all PSA values (different time frames and minimal intervals) [888]. O’Brien and colleagues identified more than 20 different definitions of PSAV and PSA-DT and demonstrated that obtained values could vary widely between definitions [888]. However, some rules can be considered for PSA-DT calculation [886]: At least 3 PSA measurements are required;A minimum time period between measurements (4 weeks) is preferable due to potentialstatistical ‘noise’ when PSA values are obtained too close together (this statement can bereconsidered in case of very active disease);All included PSA values should be obtained within the past twelve months at most, to reflect the current disease activity;PSA-DT is often mentioned in months, or in weeks in very active disease. These measurements do not provide additional information compared with PSA alone [479,888-890]. In the post-local therapy relapse setting, PSA-DT has been correlated with distant progression and with poorer outcomes after salvage treatments [891,892]. Prostate-specific antigen-DT has been linked with metastasis-free- and OS in non-metastatic CRPC (nmCRPC) and identifies patients with high-risk nmCRPC who benefit from intensified therapy (PSA-DT threshold < ten months) [893]. 