5.5. Diagnostic ureteroscopy. Flexible ureteroscopy (URS) is used when necessary to confirm the diagnosis of UTUC by visualising the ureter, renal pelvis and collecting system and perform a biopsy of suspicious lesions. It is also essential for meticulous tumour mapping before considering kidney-sparing options for UTUC. Presence, appearance, multifocality and size of the tumour can be determined using URS. In addition, ureteroscopic biopsies can determine tumour grade in more than 90% of cases with a low false-negative rate, regardless of sample size [106]. However, undergrading occurs with ureteroscopic diagnostic biopsy compared to nephroureterectomy specimens [107], making second-look URS necessary, as part of follow-up if kidney-sparing treatment is chosen [84,108,109] . Ureteroscopy also facilitates selective ureteral sampling for cytology [101,110,111]. Stage assessment using ureteroscopic biopsy can be inaccurate, hence, combining ureteroscopic biopsy grade, imaging findings, and urinary cytology may help in the decision-making process between radical nephroureterectomy (RNU) and kidney-sparing therapy [111,112]. In a meta-analysis comparing URS vs. no URS prior to RNU, 8 out of 12 studies found an increased risk for intravesical recurrence in those undergoing URS [113]. Performing a biopsy at URS was also identified as a risk factor for intravesical recurrence [113]. A second systematic review of 16 studies showed that URS alone was not significantly related to intravesical recurrence; whereas URS with a biopsy significantly increased the risk for subsequent intravesical recurrence albeit without an impact on overall survival and non-urothelial recurrence [114]. This underlines the need for a study evaluating whether an immediate intravesical instillation of chemotherapy in patients who underwent URS plus biopsy, or laser treatment, for UTUC can lower the intravesical recurrence rate after RNU (see section 7.2.4.2). Technical developments in flexible ureteroscopes and the use of novel imaging techniques may improve visualisation and diagnosis of flat lesions [115]. Narrow-band imaging is a promising technique, but results are preliminary [116]. Optical coherence tomography and confocal laser endomicroscopy (Cellvizio®) have been used in vivo to evaluate tumour grade and/or for staging purposes, with a promising correlation with definitive histology in high-grade UTUC [117,118]. 