4.2. Supplemental evaluation. If history is suggestive of lower urinary tract, gynaecological, anorectal or other disease of known aetiology, diagnostic work-up should follow respective guidelines. 4.2.1. Assessing pelvic pain and related symptoms Determination of the severity of pain and associated symptoms, its progression and treatment response can be assessed only by means of a reliable and validated symptom-scoring instrument. These subjective outcome measures are recommended for the basic evaluation and therapeutic monitoring of patients. Pain should always be assessed at presentation and (see below) to identify progression and treatment response. As well as doing this in the clinic, the patient can keep a daily record (pain diary). This may need to include other relevant variables such as voiding, sexual activity, activity levels, or analgesic use. Increased attention to patient reported outcomes gives prominence to patients’ views on their disease and pain diaries, in patients’ own environments, improve data quality. Quality of life should also be measured because it can be very poor compared to other chronic diseases [235,236]. In a study more pain, pain-contingent rest, and urinary symptoms were associated with greater disability (also measured by self-report), and pain was predicted by depression and by catastrophising (helplessness subscale) [57]. Where the primary outcome of treatment is pain relief, it is useful before starting treatment to agree a clinically useful level of relief [237]. The most reliable methods are: a five point verbal scale: none, mild, moderate, severe, very severe pain;a VAS score from one to ten;an eleven point numerical scale (as below).   Pain assessment ratings are not independent of cognitive and emotional variables [56]. Target outcomes of pain severity, distress and disability co-vary only partly, and improvement in one does not necessarily imply improvement in the others. When the primary outcome is pain its meaning should be anchored in discussion of clinically important difference [237]. Primary prostate pain syndrome Reliable, valid indices of symptoms and QoL are the NIH-CPSI [238] and the International Prostate Symptom Score (I-PSS) [239]. Primary bladder pain syndrome Symptom scores may help to assess the patient and act as outcome measures. The O’Leary-Sant Symptom Index, also known as the Interstitial Cystitis Symptom Index (ICSI) was validated in a large study [240]. Gastrointestinal questionnaire Functional anorectal pain disorders (anorectal pelvic pain) are defined and characterised by duration, frequency, and quality of pain. More complex questionnaires are used in the setting of IBS. The validated IBS Symptom Severity Scale (IBS-SSS) includes the broadest measurement of pain-related aspects [241,242]. However, as different instruments measure different endpoints of chronic abdominal pain in IBS, a comparison of published studies is often impossible. Sexual function assessment In males the most frequent effects on sexual function are ED and premature ejaculation. These can be evaluated by proper questionnaires namely IIEF and PEDT (Premature Ejaculation Diagnostic Tool). In comparison with controls, women with chronic pelvic pain reported significantly more sexual avoidance behaviour, non-sensuality, and complaints of “vaginismus” [196]. The Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) has been developed as a brief, multi-dimensional self-report instrument for assessing the key dimensions of sexual function in women, which includes desire, subjective arousal, lubrication, orgasm, satisfaction, and pain. The corresponding evidence in men is lacking. 4.2.2. Focused myofascial evaluation Pelvic floor muscle testing can be done by the medical doctor but a consultation of the pelvic floor by a physiotherapist is a good alternative, but either should have had appropriate training in pelvic assessment. A vaginal or rectal examination is performed to assess the function of the pelvic floor muscles, according to the International Continence Society (ICS) report. This assessment has been tested and shows satisfactory validity and intra-observer reliability. It can therefore be considered suitable for use in clinical practice [243]. Rectal examination is a good way to test the pelvic floor function in men [244]. There is a growing number of reports on the use of ultrasound (US) in establishing the function of the pelvic floor muscles. The exact place in the diagnostic setting needs to be addressed in the future [245]. In a cohort study of 72 men with chronic pelvic pain, the relationship between the locations of the trigger point and the referred pain was examined. Ninety percent of the patients showed tenderness in the puborectalis muscle and 55% in the abdominal wall muscles. Of the patients in whom trigger points were found in the puborectalis, 93% reported pain in the penis and 57% in the suprapubic region. Patients with trigger points in the abdominal muscles reported pain in the penis (74%), perineum (65%) and rectum (46%) [246]. In addition, a broad musculoskeletal (tender point) evaluation, including muscles outside the pelvis, helps to diagnose the myofascial pain aspects of the pelvic pain in phenotyping pelvic pain patients [247,248]. 4.2.3. Neurological Injections An injection of local anaesthetic and steroid at the site of nerve injury may be diagnostic. Differential block of the pudendal nerve helps to provide information in relation to the site where the nerve may be trapped [249,250]. Infiltration at the ischial spine requires the use of a nerve stimulator/locator. Both motor (anal contraction) and sensory endpoints may be noted. The anatomical target may be localised by fluoroscopy, computed tomography (CT) guidance, or the use of US. Ultrasound avoids any form of radiation, whereas CT guidance involves a significant amount of radiation. As well as injecting around the pudendal nerve, specific blocks of other nerves arising from the pelvis may be performed. Electrophysiological studies These may reveal signs of perineal denervation, increased pudendal nerve latency, or impaired bulbocavernosus reflex [251,252]. However, for an abnormality to be detected, significant nerve damage is probably necessary. Pain may be associated with limited nerve damage, therefore, these investigations are often normal. 4.2.4. Imaging Ancillary studies should be performed according to appropriate guidelines for exclusion of diseases with known aetiology presenting with symptoms identical to those of CPPS. Once the latter diagnosis is established, studies can be useful to assess functional abnormalities and phenotype conditions such as PBPS, and primary chronic anal pain syndrome. Ultrasound Ultrasound has limited value but may reassure patients. However, over-investigating may be detrimental. MRI Magnetic resonance neurography has been increasingly used in specialised centres for the diagnosis of the location (proximal vs. peripheral) and degree (total vs. partial) of nerve injury in the peripheral nervous system, earlier and with higher specificity than conduction studies. This may show benefits for CPPPS in the coming years. MR defecating proctogram Magnetic resonance imaging in conjunction with MR defecography has become the most valuable imaging technique to assess anorectal function dynamically. Magnetic resonance imaging studies simultaneously outline the anatomy of the pelvic floor and visualise different structural and functional pathologies, by applying dynamic sequences after filling of the rectum with a viscous contrast medium (e.g., US gel). The following pathologies can be visualised: pelvic floor descent, an abnormal anorectal angle while squeezing and straining, rectal intussusception, rectocele, enterocele and cystocele. However, limitations of MR defecography are the left lateral or supine position and the limited space for the patient, which may reduce the ability to strain and thereby reduce the sensitivity of the method, underestimating the size of entero- and rectoceles as well as the amount of intussusception. Functional neuroimaging Functional neuroimaging, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is currently being re-evaluated as a research tool and some groups have raised issues around over interpretation [253]. With regards to pain, fMRI findings may represent a pain matrix or may represent non-specific threat processing [254]. Currently this panel cannot recommend fMRI as a clinical tool [255]. 4.2.5. Laboratory Tests Microbiology tests Primary prostate pain syndrome Laboratory diagnosis of prostatitis has been classically based on the four-glass test for bacterial localisation [256]. Besides sterile pre-massage urine (voided bladder urine-2), PPPS shows < 103 cfu/mL of uropathogenic bacteria in expressed prostatic secretions and insignificant numbers of leukocytes or bacterial growth in ejaculates. However, this test is too complex for use by practising urologists. Diagnostic efficiency may be enhanced cost-effectively by a simple screening procedure, that is, the two-glass test or pre-post-massage test (PPMT) [257,258]. Overall, these tests help only a little in the diagnosis of PPPS, because 8% of patients with suggested PPPS have been found to have positive prostatic localisation cultures, similar to the percentage of asymptomatic men [259]. Primary bladder pain syndrome Urine dipstick and urine culture (including culture for Tuberculosis if sterile pyuria) are recommended in all patients suspected of having PBPS. Urine cytology is also recommended in risk groups. Gynaecological aspects of chronic pelvic pain Vaginal and endocervical swabs to exclude infection are recommended. In specific cases, imaging may be required to help rule out a defined pathology such as sacral neuropathy in endometriosis [260] 4.2.6. Invasive tests Anorectal pain Anorectal manometry with sensory testing (pressure volume measurement: barostat) may be useful to diagnose dyssynergic defecation and hypersensitivity of the rectum which are typical for patients with CPPPS and IBS. Anorectal manometry and the ballon expulsion test (BET) may also help to predict the response to biofeefback therapy in Levator Ani Syndrome [119]. Flexible rectosigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy should be considered in patients with anorectal pain to rule out coincidental colorectal pathology. Laparoscopy for females Laparoscopy is perhaps the most useful invasive investigation to exclude gynaecological pathology [261,262] and to assist in the differential diagnosis of CPPPS in women [263,264]. Often, it is combined with cystoscopy [265,266] and/or proctoscopy to help identify the site of multi-compartment pain. Psychological considerations around laparoscopy Three very different studies of laparoscopy suggest that it can improve pain through resolving concerns about serious disease [267]. Integrating somatic and psychological assessment from the start rather than dealing with psychological concerns only after excluding organic causes of pelvic pain is helpful [268]. Cystoscopy and bladder biopsy Despite controversy on the diagnostic and follow-up value of cystoscopy in PBPS [269-273] the panel believes that objective findings are important for diagnosis, prognosis and ruling out other treatable conditions (a standardised scheme of diagnostic criteria will also contribute to uniformity and comparability of different studies) [274]. Endoscopically, PBPS type 3 displays reddened mucosal areas often associated with small vessels radiating towards a central scar, sometimes covered by a small clot or fibrin deposit - the Hunner's lesion [232]. The scar ruptures with increasing bladder distension, producing a characteristic waterfall type of bleeding. There is a strong association between PBPS type 3 and reduced bladder capacity under anaesthesia [275]. Non-lesion disease displays a normal bladder mucosa at initial cystoscopy. The development of glomerulations after hydrodistension is considered to be a positive diagnostic sign although they can be observed without PBPS [276]. Biopsies are helpful in establishing or supporting the clinical diagnosis of both classic and non-lesion types of the disease [131,156,274,277,278]. Important differential diagnoses to exclude, by histological examination, are carcinoma in situ and tuberculous cystitis [279]. Table 4: ESSIC classification of PBPS types according to results of cystoscopy with hydrodistension and biopsies [16] Cystoscopy with hydrodistensionNot doneNormalGlomerulationsaHunner's lesionbBiopsyNot doneXX1X2X3XNormalXA1A2A3AInconclusiveXB1B2B3BPositivecXC1C2C3C aCystoscopy: glomerulations grade 2-3.bLesion per Fall’s definition with/without glomerulations.cHistology showing inflammatory infiltrates and/or detrusor mastocytosis and/or granulation tissue and/or intrafascicular fibrosis. 