4.4. Other painful conditions without a urological cause. Dysmenorrhoea Menstrual pain or ‘dysmenorrhoea’ may be primary or secondary. Primary dysmenorrhoea classically begins at the onset of ovulatory menstrual cycles and tends to decrease following childbirth [263]. Secondary dysmenorrhoea suggests the development of a pathological process, such as endometriosis [262], adenomyosis or pelvic infection, which need to be excluded. Infection In pre-menopausal women, a history of Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID) must be excluded. A patient’s sexual history should be taken along with swabs to exclude chlamydia and gonorrhoea infection. Bacterial and viral genital tract pathogens should also be excluded [280], as they can cause severe pelvic/vaginal/vulvar pain [281] and are associated with ulcerating lesions and inflammation, which may lead to urinary retention [282]. If there is any doubt about the diagnosis, laparoscopy may be helpful, as one of the differential diagnoses is endometriosis. Endometriosis and adenomyosis The incidence of endometriosis is rising in the developed world. It has widespread impact on women’s lives [283], with pain more important than physical findings in determining QoL [284]. The precise aetiology is unknown, but an association with infertility is recognised [285]. A diagnosis is usually made when a history of secondary dysmenorrhoea and/or dyspareunia exists [286]. On examination, there is often tenderness in the lateral vaginal fornices, reduced uterine mobility, tenderness in the recto-vaginal septum, and on occasion, adnexal masses. Laparoscopy is the most useful diagnostic tool [287]. Adenomyosis is associated with augmented pain during menses [288]. It is diagnosed by an US scan of the uterus, which often shows cystic dilatation of the myometrium [289]. Gynaecological malignancy The spread of gynaecological malignancy of the cervix, uterine body or ovary will cause pelvic pain depending on the site of spread. Injuries related to childbirth Trauma occurring at the time of childbirth may lead to chronic pelvic pain related to the site of injury [290]. Female sexual dysfunction is perhaps the commonest presenting problem [291], though increasingly women are reporting other symptoms such as pelvic girdle pain and other genito-pelvic pain of different aetiology [292]. There is often a transient problem with oestrogen deficiency in the post-partum period and during breastfeeding, which can compound this situation. Denervation of the pelvic floor can similarly compound the situation [293]. Pain associated with pelvic organ prolapse and prolapse surgery Pelvic organ prolapse is often asymptomatic, unless it is so marked that it causes back pain, vaginal pain and skin excoriation [294]. Prolapse is often a disease of older women, and it is often associated with post-menopausal oestrogen deficiency, which may lead to pain associated with intercourse. Prolapse surgery has entailed the use of non-absorbable mesh (usually in the form of “mesh kits”). Although they may have a role in supporting the vagina, they are also associated with several complications including bladder, bowel and vaginal trauma [295], chronic pain [296] and neuropathy [297]. Patients need to be fully evaluated and may need specialised imaging, using contrast mediums if necessary, to make a diagnosis of the possible cause of the pain [298-301]. Haemorrhoids Chronic pelvic pain is rare in haemorrhoidal disease because endoscopic and surgical treatment is mostly effective in acute disease. The most frequent aetiology of pain without significant bleeding is thrombosed external haemorrhoids or an anal fissure. Haemorrhoidal pain on defecation associated with bleeding is usually due to prolapse or ulceration of internal haemorrhoids. Anaemia from haemorrhoidal bleeding is rare but may arise in patients on anti-coagulation therapy, or those with clotting disorders. Anal fissure Anal fissures are tears in the distal anal canal and induce pain during and after defecation. The pain can last for several minutes to hours. Persistence of symptoms beyond six weeks or visible transversal anal sphincter fibres define chronicity. Fissures located off the midline are often associated with specific diseases such as Crohn’s disease or anal cancer. Internal anal sphincter spasms and ischaemia are associated with chronic fissures. Proctitis Abdominal and pelvic pain in patients with inflammatory bowel disease and proctitis are often difficult to interpret. Faecal calprotectin may help to differentiate between inflammation and functional pain, to spare steroids. Irritable bowel syndrome Although IBS can be associated with pelvic pain, the panel consider a full discussion of this topic beyond the scope of these guidelines. A number of high quality clinical guidelines address this topic [234,302]. 