5.1. Conservative management. 5.1.1. Pain education It is always valuable to include education about the causes of pain, including eliciting from patients their anxieties about undiscovered pathology and addressing them. Information improves adherence to treatment and underpins self-management, as shown in bladder pain syndrome and in many other painful and nonpainful disorders [305]. 5.1.2. Physical therapy The physiotherapist is part of the pain management team; (including doctors, psychologists and nurses). The therapeutic options for physiotherapists may not be the same in every country. Physiotherapists can either specifically treat the pathology of the pelvic floor muscles, or more generally treat myofascial pain if it is part of the pelvic pain syndrome. In most studies that have been done looking at the effect of physiotherapy in pelvic pain, the treatment of the pelvic floor is only part of the pain management. In a review about physiotherapy in women with pelvic pain, it was concluded that recommendations for physiotherapy should be given with caution [306]. The review found six RCTs, of which three showed level 1b evidence with low-risk of bias. One of these three found that Mensendieck somatocognitive therapy showed a pain reduction after one year follow-up of 64%. This approach consists of myofascial relaxation and tension, improving posture and movement in combination with cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) [307]. Pelvic floor muscle pain Treating pelvic floor over-activity and myofascial trigger points should be considered in the management of chronic pelvic pain. Treatment should be done by specialised physiotherapists who are trained not only in the musculoskeletal aspects of pain, but also in the psychological mechanisms and the role of the CNS in chronic pain. For patients with chronic pelvic pain and dysfunction of the pelvic floor muscles, it is very helpful to learn how to relax the muscles when the pain starts. By doing this, the circle of pain-spasm-pain can be interrupted. In the case of shortened muscles, relaxation alone is not enough. Stretching of the muscle is mandatory to regain length and function. Studies on physical therapy for pelvic floor pain syndrome have been sparse. A single blinded RCT with myofascial physical therapy and general body massage was carried out in patients with prostate or bladder pain. The global response rate (RR) to treatment with massage was significantly better in the prostate than in the bladder pain group (57% vs. 21%). In the prostate pain group, there was no difference between the two treatment arms. In the bladder pain group, myofascial treatment did significantly better than massage. Massage only improved complaints in the prostate pain group. The fact that gender distribution was different in each group is mentioned as a possible confounding factor [308]. In an RCT of 84 patients with PPPS comparing so-called conventional therapy (α-blockers, anti-inflammatory drugs and sitz baths) with biofeedback and pelvic floor muscle relaxation therapy, the authors were able to demonstrate an improvement in both groups after three months, but three months after the end of treatment, the effects only persisted in the biofeedback and pelvic floor muscle relaxation therapy patients [309]. Myofascial trigger point release Treatment of myofascial trigger points can be done by manual therapy, dry needling and wet needling. The evidence for all the different treatments is weak, with most studies showing no significant difference between these techniques, though most studies were small and heterogeneous with regards to the patients and methods. There is no evidence that manual techniques are more effective than no treatment [310]. Most studies of dry needling have compared with wet needling. Different SRs have come to the conclusion that, although there is an effect of needling on pain, it is neither supported nor refuted that this effect is better than placebo [311]. Physiotherapy in PBPS Transvaginal manual therapy of the pelvic floor musculature (Thiele massage) in PBPS patients with high-tone dysfunction of the pelvic floor significantly improved several assessment scales [312]. The role of specific levator ani trigger point injections in women with chronic pelvic pain has been studied [313]. Each trigger point was identified by intravaginal palpation and injected with bupivacaine, lidocaine and triamcinolone. Seventy-two percent of women improved with the first trigger point injection, with 33% being completely pain-free. Efficacy and safety of pelvic floor myofascial physical therapy has been compared with global therapeutic massage in women with PBPS; global response assessment (GRA) rate was 59% and 26%, respectively. Pain, urgency and frequency ratings, and symptoms decreased in both groups during follow-up, and did not differ significantly between the groups. This suggests that myofascial physical therapy is beneficial in women with PBPS [314]. Primary Anal Pain Syndrome An RCT demonstrated that biofeedback treatment was superior to electrogalvanic stimulation and massage of the Levator muscle for treating chronic primary anal pain syndrome [119]. One hundred and fifty-seven patients who had at least weekly rectal pain were investigated, but only patients with tenderness on traction of the pelvic floor showed a significant treatment benefit. In patients with tenderness of the puborectalis muscle (Rome II: “Highly likely Levator Ani Syndrome”), 87% reported adequate relief after one month of biofeedback vs. 45% for electrogalvanic stimulation, and 22% for massage. These results were maintained at twelve months with adequate relief after nine sessions of biofeedback in 58% of the whole group (Rome II: “Highly likely” and “Possible Levator Ani Syndrome”), after galvanic stimulation in 27% and massage in 21% of patients. As previously described in dyssynergic defecation, the ability to expel a 50 mL water filled balloon and to relax pelvic floor muscles after biofeedback treatment were predictive of a favourable therapeutic outcome [119]. The pathophysiology of the chronic primary anal pain syndrome is therefore similar to that of dyssynergic defecation, and this favours the role of the pelvic floor muscles in the pathophysiology of both conditions. Other treatment modalities have been less successful. Treatment of sexual dysfunctions and chronic pelvic pain Couples often benefit from early referral for relationship and sexual counselling during their treatment course [315]. It needs to be remembered that sexual difficulties will arise as a result of pelvic pain syndromes as well as those disorders potentially being primary. Specific behavioural strategies for women who have urogenital complaints and female sexual dysfunction often include exploring alternatives to sexual intercourse (manual or oral pleasuring), different coital positions (female superior or side lying), and pacing, such as limiting the activity to less than that which causes pain. Planning for the time of intercourse is important, and scheduling a clinic visit after intercourse might be useful to identify specific sites and causes of post-coital flares. The corresponding evidence in men is lacking, but similar principles would apply. Other behavioural changes involve pre- and post-coital voiding, application of ice packs to the genital or suprapubic area [315,316], and increased use of vaginal dilators, fingers or sex toys. Lubricants can also be used and women with signs of vulvovaginal atrophy may benefit from oestrogen cream [317]. Optimising the pelvic floor muscle is indicated when dysfunction is present and will relieve the pain [318-320]. Other physical therapy interventions Electromagnetic therapy. A small, sham-controlled, double-blind study of four weeks showed a significant, sustained effect over a one-year period for CPPPS [321]. Microwave thermotherapy. In uncontrolled studies significant symptomatic improvement has been reported from heat therapy, for example, transrectal and transurethral thermotherapy [322,323]. Extracorporeal shockwave therapy. A small sham-controlled double-blind study of four times weekly perineal extracorporeal shockwave therapy (n=30) in men with CPPPS showed significant improvement in pain, QoL, and voiding compared to the control group (n=30), over twelve weeks [324]. Two other randomised sham-controlled studies, have been published more recently, one comparing ten treatment sessions over two weeks (n=40 vs. n=40) [325], another with four times weekly treatments (n=20 vs. n=20) [326]. Both concluded there was a significant effect in terms of total NIH-CPSI score and pain at twelve weeks. Unfortunately, no long term effects at 24 weeks could be shown in a published follow-up study of the second [327]. A Cochrane review of non-pharmacological interventions for chronic pelvic pain reported a reduction in symptoms following treatment compared with control and concluded that extracorporeal shockwave therapy may improve symptoms without an increase in adverse events [328]. In addition, a recent SR and meta-analysis concluded that extracorporeal shockwave therapy is effective for the improvement of pain and quality of life, but longterm efficacy was non-significant [329]. Publications show a potential role for external shock wave lithotripsy applied to the bladder. In an RCT enrolling 54 patients, improvement in the VAS > 3 was 57.1% vs. 19.0% (ESWT vs. placebo; P =.011), at 12 weeks post treatment. However, the primary endpoint did not reach significance [330]. Acupuncture. An RCT comparing acupuncture (n=50) vs. shamcontrolled (n=50), once weekly treatment for six weeks showed significant long lasting improvement at 24 weeks in terms of RR and overall symptom scores [331]. Another RCT showed a significant effect for a follow-up of 32 weeks [332]. Two SRs and meta-analyses were published in 2016 analysing seven RCTs on a total of 471 participants comparing acupuncture to sham control or oral medical treatment [333,334]. Both came to the conclusion that acupuncture was effective and safe, significantly reducing total NIH-CPSI scores compared to sham or medical treatment, and should be considered as a treatment option. This is in line with the conclusion of a Cochrane review [328] on non-pharmacological treatment options. In a large multicentre RCT comparing acupuncture (N=220) with sham acupuncture (N=220) in patients with PPPS over a period of 8 weeks (20 sessions), the authors could show a superior improvement of symptoms in the acupuncture group with durable effects 24 weeks after treatment [335]. In a more recently published SR and meta-analysis of only high quality trials (JADAD score >=4), the authors concluded that acupuncture compared to sham acupuncture was superior in terms of pain score, NIH-CPSI score, quality of life score, urinary symptom, and efficacy rate [336]. Posterior tibial nerve stimulation. See section 5.3.2, Neuromodulation. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation. See section 5.3.2, Neuromodulation. 5.1.3. Psychological therapy Psychological interventions may be directed at pain itself or at adjustment to pain in terms of function and mood and reduced health-care use, with or without pain reduction. Ideally, treatment follows general principles and practice in the field of chronic pain [337,338] but these have been neglected in pelvic pain. Three SRs and meta-analyses of the few heterogeneous trials of psychologically based treatment for pelvic pain [339-341] found benefits for pain comparable to those from pharmacotherapy over a few months, but this was not sustained at follow-up. Exposure to pain-related fears in women with chronic pelvic pain proved superior to manual therapy in reducing those fears and overall pain disability, albeit assessed only by self-report [342]. The importance of multi-disciplinary treatment is emphasised by several reviews [44,343,344] of intervention for diverse chronic pains, but standard multi-component psychologically-based programmes for pelvic pains are mostly in the pilot stages [345], with mixed findings so far [346]. For primary focal vulvar pain syndrome, multimodal physiotherapy integrating psychological components has shown beneficial effects, although more research on the effects of psychological therapy and multi-component psychologically-based programmes is needed in this patient group [347]. For less disabled and distressed patients treatment can be delivered remotely [348,349]. 5.1.4. Dietary treatment Scientific data are limited and dietary restriction alone does not produce significant symptomatic relief; however, consider the involvement of a dietician. 