4.2.4.1.3.4. Efficacy of pelvic floor muscle training in childbearing women. Pelvic floor muscle training to prevent SUI has been studied during pregnancy and in the postpartum period and the results are not reported separately for SUI and other subgroups of UI. A Cochrane review concluded that PFMT in women with and without UI (combined primary and secondary prevention) during pregnancy, produced a 26% reduced risk of UI during pregnancy and the mid-postnatal period [329]. Furthermore, pregnant continent women (primary prevention) who exercised the PFM during pregnancy were 62% less likely to experience UI in late pregnancy and had 29% lower risk of UI three to six months after giving birth. There is insufficient evidence for a long-term effect of antenatal PFMT beyond six to twelve months postpartum. Compared with usual care, there is no evidence that antenatal PFMT in incontinent women decreases incontinence in late pregnancy (very low-quality evidence), or in the mid- (low-quality evidence) or late postnatal periods (very low-quality evidence). There have been fewer RCTs in the postpartum period than during pregnancy [329]. No primary prevention studies were found in women after birth. For PFMT started after delivery, in a mixed group of continent and incontinent women, there was uncertainty about the effect on UI risk in the late postnatal period (three trials, 826 women; moderate-quality evidence), and in postnatal women with persistent UI, there is no evidence that PFMT results in a difference in UI at more than six to twelve months postpartum (three trials; 696 women; low-quality evidence). However, another RCT found that UI was less frequent in the intervention group, with 57% of patients still symptomatic, compared to 82% of controls, as was bladder-related problems with a prevalence of 27% in the intervention vs. 60% in the control group [330]. Randomised controlled trials of high interventional and methodological quality are needed in the postpartum period. 