4.2.4.1.3.2. Efficacy of electrical stimulation. There is lack of consensus regarding the use of ES to treat SUI. For subjective cure of SUI, a Cochrane review found moderate-quality evidence that ES is probably better than no active treatment [324]. Similar results were found for cure or improvement of SUI, but the quality of evidence was low. There is uncertainty as to whether there is a difference between ES and sham treatment in terms of subjective cure alone because of the very low quality of evidence. For subjective cure or improvement, ES may be better than sham treatment. Any comparison between ES and PFMT and other treatments is hampered by low-quality evidence. One assessor blinded RCT found that PFMT was significantly better than either the use of vaginal cones or electrical stimulation. Only PFMT showed improvement in PFM strength and SUI measured by pad test and leakage episodes compared to control [325]. Adverse effects such as pain and discomfort have been reported, and ES is not tolerated by all women [324]. In an RCT, 132 women assessed by vaginal palpation to have 0–1 on the modified Oxford grading scale (unable to contract the PFM) were randomly assigned to an eight-week intervention of learning to contract via palpation, palpation with pelvic tilt, intravaginal ES, or verbal instruction [326]. The results showed that 63.6%, 69.7%, 33.3% and 18.2% in the four groups, respectively, scored 2 after the intervention. Palpation was significantly more effective that ES, but one third of the ES group had learned a correct PFM contraction [326]. The effect on UI measured by ICIQ-UI-SF was significantly better in the palpation group. An RCT [327] compared electrical stimulation with untreated control in 64 women with 0-1 on the modified Oxford grading scale. After the intervention, the ability to contract the PFMs was acquired by 36% of the experimental group and 12% of the control group. The experimental group also improved by a mean of 2 points more than the control group on the ICIQ-UI-SF score. 