7.1.3.1. Radical nephrectomy techniques. 7.1.3.1.1. Open versus laparoscopic or robotic approach No RCTs have assessed the oncological outcomes of laparoscopic vs. open RN. A retrospective comparative study with data retrieved from a national database studying the OS of open vs. minimally-invasive RN (laparoscopic RN or RARN) showed an OS benefit in the minimally invasive RN group, as well as in hospital stay, re-admission rate, and 30-day and 90-day mortality rate [310]. However, a SR did not demonstrate any survival difference in LRN and ORN [311]. Data from one SR [311] and two NRS [312,313] showed a significantly shorter hospital stay and lower analgesic requirement for the laparoscopic RN group as compared with the open group. Convalescence time was also significantly shorter [313]. Surgical complication rates were low with very wide confidence intervals. There was no difference in complications, but operation time was significantly shorter in the open nephrectomy arm. Quality of life and perioperative outcomes were inconsistently defined, measured, or reported [270,311] (LE: 2b, based on 1 low quality SR). 7.1.3.1.2. Laparoscopic versus robotic approach Data of a large retrospective cohort study on robot-assisted laparoscopic vs. laparoscopic RN showed robot-assisted laparoscopic RN was not associated with increased risk of any or major complications but had a longer operating time and higher hospital costs compared with laparoscopic RN [314]. A SR and meta-analysis of seven studies including 1,832 patients showed no difference between the two approaches in peri-operative outcomes, including operative time, blood loss, conversion rates and complications [315]. A SR reported on robot-assisted laparoscopic vs. conventional laparoscopic RN, showing no substantial differences in local recurrence rates, nor in all-cause CSM [316]. 7.1.3.1.3. Laparoscopic single port versus laparoscopic multiport approach Similar results were seen in observational cohort studies comparing ‘portless’ and 3-port laparoscopic RN, with similar peri-operative outcomes [317,318]. 