3.3. Abdominal aspects of pelvic pain. 3.3.1. Incidence Epidemiological data on IBS and CPPPS are scarce [216]. Chronic Pelvic Pain has been shown to be one of the most common functional disorders in women of reproductive age. The monthly incidence rate of CPPPS published by Zondervan et al. was 1.58/1000 [217]. 3.3.2. Prevalence Using a vague definition of continuous or episodic pain situated below the umbilicus over six months, one study reported that CPPPS was one of the most common diagnoses in primary care units in Great Britain [217]. The monthly prevalence rate of CPPPS in this study was 21.5/1,000, with an annual prevalence of 38.3/1,000. The prevalence rates increase significantly with older age and vary significantly between regions in the UK. The overall prevalence of anorectal pain in a sample of USA householders was 11.6% for functional anorectal pain and 6.6% for Levator Ani Syndrome. The difference between male and female was small (11.1 vs 12.1%) [218]. Irritable bowel syndrome is associated with common gynaecologic problems (endometriosis, dyspareunia, and dysmenorrhoea) [219]. Fifty per cent of women who presented with abdominal pain to the gynaecologic clinic or were scheduled for laparoscopy due to CPPPS had symptoms of IBS [220]. In a survey from Olmsted county, 20% of women reported CPPPS and 40% of those met the criteria for IBS [221]. This overlap of CPPPS and IBS was associated with an increased incidence of somatisation. Not gynaecological surgical procedures but only psychosocial variables predict pain development without a different incidence of IBS in a prospective and controlled study [222]. Clinical features of pelvic floor dysfunction, gynaecological and psychological features, are related to disordered anorectal function in IBS patients, but do not predict physiological anorectal testing. 3.3.3. Influence on Quality of Life There is little known on health related quality of life (HRQoL) in patients with CPPPS. There is a need to develop validated disease specific HRQoL instruments for CPPPS in addition to sound measurement properties. More data are available in patients with IBS treated at referral centres who have comparable HRQoL scores as patients with other common disorders such as diabetes, end-stage renal disease, and inflammatory bowel disease [223]. Sub-groups of IBS with predominance of diarrhoea or constipation show no difference in HRQoL. Multi-variate analysis shows that HRQoL in patients with IBS is affected by sex and psychological conditions. 3.3.4. Costs Costs combine direct health-care costs and societal costs (productivity loss) such as under-performance and absenteeism from work. The annual costs to society can be calculated by using the average population earnings. In Germany direct care costs are estimated at €791 and societal costs €995 per patient with IBS per year which may be comparable to patients with CPPPS [224]. 3.3.5. Risk factors & underlying causes Risk factors are covered in Section 3.1.5. 