4.6.3. Diagnostic evaluation. Evaluation of nocturia should include a thorough medical history and physical examination with particular reference to history of sleep disorders, fluid balance, associated LUTS, cardiovascular and endocrine co-morbidity, renal disease, current medications, and history of urological disease [591,592]. There are several nocturia-specific symptom scores, such as the ICI Questionnaire-Nocturia, Nocturia Quality of Life Questionnaire (N-QoL), and Nocturia Impact Diary; some of which were developed in men. These questionnaires have shown good content and discriminant validity, reliability, and sensitivity to change as well. A further screening tool that aims to identify causes of nocturia is the Targeting the individual’s Aetiology of Nocturia to Guide Outcomes (TANGO) assessment tool [593-595]. The PLANET study (PLanning Appropriate Nocturia Evaluation and Treatment) has suggested a useful tool for initial history taking called the SCREeN tool, with questions focused on evaluating areas of Sleep, Cardiovascular, Renal, Endocrine and Neurological function [596]. A bladder diary is a vital initial investigation tool in patients complaining of nocturia and further supplementary investigations are guided by any abnormalities identified. Bladder diary analysis can allow for calculation of the parameters detailed in Section 4.6.2. A low nocturnal bladder capacity or global bladder capacity will be highlighted by reduced voided volumes during nocturnal hours or both night and day. This suggests an underlying urological condition such as OAB syndrome, BOO or DU. The term 24-hour polyuria is defined as 24-hour urine production > 40 mL/kg [597] and may be present in conditions such as diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus. The definition of nocturnal polyuria is age dependent and the thresholds for this diagnosis range from 20% (in younger persons) to 33% (age > 65 years) of the 24-hour urine volume produced during sleep. This may also be observed in patients with loss of circadian rhythm, cardiovascular disease, sleep apnoea, or sleep disorders [591]. A large study conducted across European and American centres involving ~2,000 patients identified nocturnal polyuria as a contributory cause of nocturia in 89% of patients who were being treated for LUT abnormalities such as OAB syndrome or benign prostatic enlargement [598]. As an alternative to the > 3-day bladder diary a nocturnal-only diary has been investigated in men [599]. The results showed acceptable sensitivity and specificity for the nocturnal bladder diary compared with the standard bladder diary for most parameters. The nocturnal-only diary was not able to diagnose 24-hour polyuria and has not yet been validated for use in women. A 2022 SR and nominal group technique (NGT) consensus exercise based on fourteen observational studies of mixed populations recommended including blood tests for renal function, thyroid function, HbA1c and calcium levels in the initial work-up of patients presenting with nocturia [600-602]. Sleep disorders are potentially highly influential in nocturia, but often overlooked. A 2022 SR and NGT expert consensus based on thirteen mixed studies (nine cohort, three cross-sectional and one case-control) recommended the use of screening questions to reach a clinical diagnosis of sleep disorder (insomnia, restless legs syndrome/periodic limb movements of sleep and parasomnias) to offer conservative treatment within primary care [601]. 4.6.3.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for diagnosis of nocturia Summary of evidenceLEA thorough medical history is an integral part of the evaluation of women presenting with nocturia, including screening for sleep disorders.4Nocturia-specific questionnaires are sensitive to symptom changes.3A bladder diary allows for calculation of important indices and can identify potential causes of nocturia.3Nocturnal-only bladder diaries have been evaluated in men only.3Consider renal function, thyroid function, HbA1c and calcium level blood tests in the initial workup of women presenting with nocturia.2 RecommendationsStrength ratingTake a complete medical history from women with nocturia, including screening for sleep disorders.StrongUse a validated questionnaire during assessment of women with nocturia and for re-evaluation during and/or after treatment.WeakUse a three-day bladder diary to assess nocturia in women.StrongDo not use nocturnal-only bladder diaries to evaluate nocturia in women.WeakConsider screening for sleep disorders and performing renal function, thyroid function, HbA1c and calcium level blood tests in the initial workup of women presenting with nocturia as predominant symptom.Strong 