4.6.4. Disease management. When evaluating the results of trials involving treatment strategies for nocturia, it is vital to examine for clinical significance as statistical significance can be achieved with small reductions in nocturia episodes. 4.6.4.1. Conservative management The individual components of self-management have not been critically evaluated and most recommendations are traditionally derived from consensus methodology. Interventions such as those listed below may help with nocturia but, for the majority, no quantification of their effect is possible: reduction of fluid intake at specific times;avoidance/moderation of intake of caffeine or alcohol;distraction techniques;bladder retraining;pelvic floor muscle training;reviewing medication;treatment of constipation. The available data for conservative treatment of nocturia show significant heterogeneity. In a SR [582], three studies [603-605] were favourable for conservative treatment with PFMT, with another failing to confirm a benefit [606]. The highest level of evidence comes from a study of 131 patients (a secondary analysis from a prospective RCT that had urgency-predominant UI as the primary inclusion criterion). The study found that training in PFM contraction, which included four sessions of biofeedback-assisted PFMT, reduced nocturia by a median 0.50 episodes per night and was significantly more effective than anticholinergic drug treatment or placebo [603]. The certainty of evidence associated with this treatment is moderate. A smaller RCT of 50 women with urinary complaints, randomised 1:1 to BT and PFMT compared with a control group receiving no treatment, showed a significant decrease in patients’ complaints of nocturia [604]. Another RCT in only 24 women compared PFMT only to Interferential Therapy plus [605]. Although the authors did not find significant differences between the groups, the change in nocturia episodes before and after treatment was statistically significant in both groups. This study was underpowered by the authors’ own admission. The level of certainty of the evidence from these two trials is low. A large randomised, two-arm, parallel design, superiority trial (n = 647; women), compared the effects of unsupervised behavioural PFMT programmes delivered in a two-hour class format and 20 minutes video format on UI prevention. No significant between-group differences of nocturia were observed at 3 months and 12 months, but at 24 months, women in the 2 hour class group were less likely to have fewer nocturia episodes (OR = 0.5; 95 % CI: 0.3−0.7; p = 0.005) compared with those in the 20 minutes video group, but the authors concluded that the evidence is not sufficient to support one management strategy [605]. A multicentre, open-labelled, RCT evaluated whether cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) using a self-assessment via a checklist is effective in improving nocturia in a mixed population (30/78 women). The mean rate of achievement of the CBT group was 64.4%. There was no significant difference between the two groups in night-time frequency based on the IPSS Q7 at four weeks but episodes of nocturia on the frequency volume chart (FVC) were significantly smaller in the CBT group (1.9 ± 0.9) than in the control group (2.4 ± 1.3; p = 0.039) [607]. In a secondary analysis from a prospective RCT, 210 women with urgency UI (UUI) were evaluated for change from baseline in the number of episodes of nocturia and nocturnal incontinence between groups allocated to medical treatment (tolterodine ER 4 mg) alone vs. medical treatment plus PFMT [606]. No significant difference between the groups was found and the actual difference in nocturia episodes in either treatment arm was small. The level of certainty of the evidence from this trial is low. A recent RCT has explored both individual and group PFMT with a specific secondary outcome of number of patients with two or more nocturia episodes per night [319]. The authors reported similar reductions, with > 30% of patients who had > 2 episodes of nocturia at baseline no longer experiencing this level of symptoms at one year after PFMT. One small, single-centre RCT in which functional magnetic stimulation was compared with no treatment in 39 women reported a significant decrease in nocturia (together with voiding frequency and pad use) in the treatment group compared with the control group [608]. In patients with obstructive sleep apnoea who complain of nocturia, continuous positive airway pressure has been shown to be effective in a SR and meta-analysis of five RCTs involving both sexes [609]. This treatment was associated with an average numerical reduction in nocturia of > 2 episodes per night. 4.6.4.1.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for conservative management of nocturia Summary of evidenceLEIndividual or group PFMT appears to be equally effective for reduction in nocturia episodes.1bMost studies evaluating PFMT for nocturia in women with additional urinary symptoms have shown positive results compared with placebo or anticholinergic drugs.1bTreatment of nocturia secondary to obstructive sleep apnoea with continuous positive airway pressure reduces nocturia episodes.1a RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer women with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) lifestyle advice prior to, or concurrent with, treatment.StrongOffer pelvic floor muscle training for nocturia (either individually or in the group setting) to women with urinary incontinence or other storage LUTS.StrongOffer women with nocturia and a history suggestive of obstructive sleep apnoea a referral to a sleep clinic for assessment of suitability for continuous positive airway pressure treatment.Strong 4.6.4.2. Pharmacological management 4.6.4.2.1. Desmopressin Desmopressin is a synthetic analogue of the hormone vasopressin and is most often used for management of nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria. In a SR [582], three trials specifically conducted in women were found but more additional data could be extracted from studies in mixed populations. The earliest evidence comes from a 1982 single-site crossover trial involving 25 women treated with 20 g desmopressin or placebo and revealed a significant decrease in nocturnal urine output at six weeks [610]. A more recent multicentre, multinational double-blind RCT involving 141 women used desmopressin 0.1, 0.2 or 0.4 mg orally at bedtime after a dose-titration period [611]. This increased the likelihood of a positive outcome because non-responders were excluded at that stage. At three weeks, significant reductions in nocturnal urinary frequency and nocturnal diuresis were reported. In another multicentre double-blind RCT, 58 women were randomised into five groups (twelve receiving placebo, twelve desmopressin 10 μg, eleven desmopressin 25 μg, eleven desmopressin 50 μg and twelve desmopressin 100 μg) for four weeks [612]. A dose–response relationship was observed, and women appeared more sensitive than men to desmopressin. Significant changes in nocturnal urine volumes were reported in favour of the higher desmopressin doses. Differences in the nocturnal polyuria index also tended to favour desmopressin over placebo and the higher desmopressin doses. The level of certainty of the evidence from these trials is low. Desmopressin can be safely combined with anticholinergics with significant benefit in women with OAB and nocturnal polyuria, as shown by a multicentre RCT of 97 patients [613]. A post hoc analysis of data comparing three-month once-daily combination (desmopressin 25 μg/tolterodine 4 mg, n = 49) or monotherapy (tolterodine 4 mg/placebo, n = 57) revealed a significant reduction in nocturnal void volume and time to first nocturnal void in favour of combination therapy. The level of certainty of the evidence from this trial is moderate. Pooled data from three RCTs were used to examine the adverse event profile of desmopressin, specifically hyponatraemia [614]. The authors reported that the majority tolerate desmopressin treatment without clinically significant hyponatraemia, but risk increased with age and lower baseline serum sodium concentration. They advised that desmopressin treatment in elderly patients should include careful monitoring of the serum sodium concentration and should be avoided in patients with a baseline serum sodium concentration below normal range. 4.6.4.2.2. Anticholinergics A SR [582] identified three RCTs involving anticholinergics such as oxybutynin 2.5 mg/day [603] and tolterodine 4 mg/day [606,613]. A secondary analysis from a prospective RCT involving 131 women with nocturia followed up for eight weeks found that women receiving 2.5 mg immediate-release oxybutynin once daily (with the possibility of self-titration and dose escalation to 5 mg three times daily) had fewer nocturia episodes than women receiving placebo [603]. Women receiving oxybutynin plus behavioural therapy also exhibited a significant decrease in nocturia episodes compared with placebo and oxybutynin alone. A multicentre RCT with 305 women followed up for eight weeks examined the efficacy of tolterodine tartrate 4 mg alone or in combination with behavioural training [606]. Significant differences compared with baseline were observed in mean nocturia episodes and nocturnal incontinence episodes in both groups, but no difference was reported between the two treatment groups. The level of certainty of the evidence from this trial is moderate. In an RCT including 97 women with nocturnal polyuria and OAB syndrome, comparing three months of once daily combination (desmopressin 25 μg/tolterodine 4 mg, n = 49) or monotherapy (tolterodine 4 mg/placebo, n = 57), a significant reduction in mean number of nocturnal voids compared with baseline was reported in both groups [613]. The level of certainty of the evidence from this trial is moderate. A large comparative study followed 407 women with OAB and nocturia for four weeks [615]. The patients were given tolterodine as monotherapy in one group, and tolterodine combined with estazolam (a benzodiazepine) in the other group. Significant changes from baseline in both groups for the main outcome of number of nocturia episodes were reported. Combination therapy showed a significant benefit for women with OAB and nocturia compared with monotherapy in terms of differences in number of nocturia episodes, urgency episodes in 24 hours, UUI episodes in 24 hours, and voided volume per micturition. The level of certainty of the evidence from this trial is very low. A small multicentre RCT compared oxybutynin patch vs. mirabegron on nocturia-related QoL in women with OAB. Both treatments showed improvements in N-QoL score at four weeks, but mirabegron showed statistical differences at eight weeks. Additionally, only mirabegron decreased nocturnal frequency and water intake, and prolonged hours of uninterrupted sleep eight weeks after administration with statistical significance, whereas oxybutynin patch did not [616]. 4.6.4.2.3. Oestrogens In a SR [582], only a single RCT investigating the efficacy of oestrogen for nocturia was identified [617]. This trial compared an oestradiol-releasing vaginal ring with an oestriol vaginal pessary in 251 women followed up for six months. There was no difference between the treatment groups in the number of women reporting nocturia, although they reported significant change from baseline in both treatment arms with > 50% of subjects responding in each arm. The certainty of evidence for this outcome was low. 4.6.4.2.4. Diuretic treatment In a randomised placebo-controlled study an afternoon dose of 40 mg furosemide (taken six hours before bedtime) in an attempt to establish complete diuresis before bedtime was given to elderly men [618]. In the 43 men who completed the study, night-time frequency in the furosemide group fell by 0.5 episodes compared with placebo, and percentage night-time voided volume fell by 18%. No such study has been carried out in female patients. 4.6.4.3. Summary of evidence and recommendations for pharmacological management of nocturia Summary of evidenceLEDesmopressin treatment for nocturia shows significant reductions in nocturnal urine output, nocturnal urinary frequency, and nocturnal polyuria index.1bMost nocturia patients tolerate desmopressin treatment without clinically significant hyponatraemia; however, the risk increases with increasing age and decreasing baseline serum sodium concentration.1aTreatment of nocturia in OAB patients with anticholinergic drugs shows reduction in nocturia episodes.1bCombination of PFMT and anticholinergics does not appear to confer additional benefit over anticholinergics alone.1bCombination of anticholinergic and desmopressin treatment appears to reduce nocturnal voided volume and time to first nocturnal void in women with nocturnal polyuria.1bVaginal oestrogen may be beneficial in the treatment of nocturia in around 50% of women.1bAfternoon (timed) diuretic treatment with furosemide reduces nocturia episodes and nocturnal voided volume in men but no similar studies have been conducted in women.1bAssessment of clinical significance is important when evaluating trials involving treatment strategies for nocturia, as statistical significance can be achieved with small reductions in nocturia episodes.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingOffer desmopressin treatment for nocturia secondary to nocturnal polyuria to women, following appropriate counselling regarding the potential benefits and associated risks (including hyponatraemia).StrongCarefully monitor serum sodium concentration in elderly patients treated with desmopressin. Avoid prescribing desmopressin to patients with a baseline serum sodium concentration below normal range.StrongOffer anticholinergic treatment for nocturia to women with urge urinary incontinence or other LUTS, following appropriate counselling regarding the potential benefits and associated risks.StrongInform women with nocturia that combination of behavioural therapy and anticholinergic drugs is unlikely to provide increased efficacy compared with either modality alone.WeakOffer combination of anticholinergics and desmopressin to women with overactive bladder and nocturia secondary to nocturnal polyuria, following appropriate counselling regarding the potential benefits and associated risks.WeakOffer vaginal oestrogen treatment to women with nocturia, following appropriate counselling regarding the potential benefits and associated risks.WeakOffer timed diuretic treatment to women with nocturia secondary to polyuria, following appropriate counselling regarding the potential benefits and associated risks.Weak 4.6.4.4. Surgical management Surgical treatment is generally reserved for those with underlying correctable LUT disorders. The effect of surgical treatments on symptoms of nocturia can be found in the relevant condition-specific sections of this guideline. 