6.3.1.5. Specific considerations for lichen sclerosus-related penile urethral strictures. Given the fact that LS affects the skin, the use of genital skin as a flap or graft is not advised as the risk of disease recurrence has been reported to be high (50-100%) and while most of recurrences tend to occur within the first two to three post-operative years, late recurrences have been reported [307]. Main strategies are single-stage or staged oral mucosa graft urethroplasty. The EAU Urethral Strictures Guidelines Panel conducted a SR [6] to explore the role of single-stage oral mucosa graft urethroplasty in the management of LS-related urethral strictures and to compare its outcomes with alternative management options (surgical dilatations +/- ISD; surgical dilatations + local steroids +/- ISD; staged oral mucosa urethroplasty; penile skin urethroplasty; meatotomy/meatoplasty; urethrotomy [Otis, DVIU]; perineal urethrostomy; urinary diversion [e.g., suprapubic catheterisation]). In total, fifteen studies met the inclusion criteria, recruiting a total of 649 patients (366 from five non randomised comparative studies and 283 from ten, single-arm retrospective observational studies). Singlestage OMG urethroplasty resulted in success rates ranging from 65-100% after twelve to 67 months mean or median follow-up. For staged OMG urethroplasty, the most commonly reported comparator, the success rates were somewhat lower and varied between 60-79%. Methodological issues (mainly selection bias) could explain the difference in success rates rather than the intervention itself. Complications were uncommon (0-12%) and mainly comprised Grade 1-3 events. Due to the overall very poor quality of evidence, the SR did not provide a clear answer as to whether singlestage OMG urethroplasty is superior to other management options, although careful patient selection is highlighted. In the absence of adverse local tissue conditions, a single-stage approach could lead to high success rates with an improvement in voiding symptoms and QoL. Summary of evidenceLELichen sclerosus is a skin condition that can lead to scarring, and recurrence rates after skin graft/flap augmentation urethroplasties have been reported to be high (50-100%).4Single-stage oral mucosa graft (OMG) urethroplasty provides patency rates between 65 and 100% and is not inferior to staged OMG urethroplasty.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingDo not use genital skin in augmentation penile urethroplasty in men with lichen sclerosus (LS) related strictures.StrongPerform single-stage oral mucosa graft urethroplasty in the absence of adverse local conditions in men with LS related strictures.Weak 