6.3.1.4. Specific considerations for failed hypospadias repair-related strictures. The term “failed hypospadias repair” (FHR) includes a wide range of abnormalities after previous attempts for reconstruction, such as glans deformity, recurrent urethral stricture, glans/urethral dehiscence, UCF and penile chordee [287-289]. The management of FHR is challenging as the urethral plate, penile skin and dartos fascia are often deficient/non-existent. Management of these patients is often made more difficult due to incomplete health records and a lack of critical information (original meatal site, number, and type of previous repairs) [261,290]. In addition, multiple operations might need to be offered to reach satisfactory outcomes [287]. As a result, FHR should always be considered as a complex condition and it is advised that FHR management takes place in high-volume centres [288,289,291,292]. “Hypospadias cripples” is a term widely used to describe the group of men with multiple previous failed attempts to correct the condition resulting in unfavourable results such as severe scarring, penile deformity and shortening, hair or stones in the urethra, UCF, chordee and functional disorders (e.g., urinary, or sexual dysfunction). This term should be avoided and a more neutral one should replace it as it further stigmatises men with hypospadias who have been shown to have reduced self-esteem and confidence due to unsatisfactory cosmesis, and problematic urinary and sexual function. Moreover, it has been reported that FHR patients experience high rates of disappointment after failure of attempted repair and a sense of helplessness as they are frequently advised that their failed hypospadias is too complex to correct and they should not pursue further repair [288-290,293,294]. Two main approaches are applicable: single-stage or staged procedures. In general, it is advised that staged procedures should be followed when the urethral plate is inadequate for a single-stage operation. Surgeons should consent patients for both types of urethroplasty as the surgical approach might need to be modified intra-operatively depending on favourable/unfavourable intra-operative findings. Besides poor-quality of the urethral plate, these unfavourable findings include high degree of scarring and presence of concomitant LS, UCF and/or chordee. It is not uncommon for men with FHR to have scarred skin or concurrent LS and thus, skin grafts or flaps should be avoided as the risk of recurrence due to LS is very high (90% in long-term follow-up as reported by Depasquale et al.) [39,295,296]. Staged repairs (using mainly BMG) reported patency rates ranging from 71-95% [293,295,257,297,298], while single-stage repairs had patency rates from 80-100% [295,297,299-302]. It needs to be highlighted that, as FHR is an umbrella term that covers various clinical conditions apart from urethral stricture disease only (such as UCF, chordee, penile deformity), “success” rates as reported by the authors in their studies do not represent urethral patency rates only. Unfortunately, the number of previous operations is either not reported or refers to the whole FHR study group collectively rather than to the subgroups of staged/single-staged procedures. A comparative analysis is reported by Barbagli et al., in 345 FHR patients at five-year follow-up. Overall failure-free survival rate was 48% for all urethroplasties, and in sub-analysis, staged techniques had significantly lower treatment failure-free survival rates compared to single-stage techniques [303]. However, it is unclear whether these groups were comparable in terms of baseline characteristics such as age, length of stricture, number of procedures, comorbidities etc. [303]. If the patients in the staged group had a more unfavourable background, this on its own could explain the final outcome rather than the surgical approach itself. Kozinn et al., reported a 16% and 14% revision rate after the first and second stage, respectively, and observed that these revision rates were higher in the FHR group compared to non-FHR patients with penile strictures [257]. There is conflicting evidence whether FHR as aetiology is a poor prognostic factor in the outcome of urethroplasty for penile strictures [255,304-306]. Concomitant UCF can be successfully managed at the same time of urethroplasty [303]. Saavendra et al., reported 89.3% stricture-free rate in 56 FHR patients with penile urethral strictures at a median of 21 months follow-up using mainly staged urethroplasty and perineal urethrostomy. Verla et al., presented departmental experience with the use of various urethroplasty techniques in a total of 76 FHR patients with penile strictures. Follow-up was long, at a median of 89 months and stricture-free rates ranged from 29% (anastomotic repair) to 90% first stage only of multistage urethroplasty). For further information see supplementary Table S6.3. Summary of evidenceLEMen with failed hypospadias repair (FHR) have history of multiple interventions, and poor-quality tissues, and might require complex procedures for a satisfactory functional and cosmetic outcome.4Men with FHR may have low self-esteem due to urinary and sexual dysfunction and unsatisfactory cosmesis.2bMen with FHR can have scarred penile skin or concurrent lichen sclerosus and outcomes with skin grafts or flaps can be unsatisfactory.3 RecommendationsStrength ratingMen with failed hypospadias repair (FHR) should be considered complex patients and referred to specialist centres for further management.WeakPropose psychological and/or psychosexual counselling to men with unsatisfactory cosmesis and sexual or urinary dysfunction related to FHR.WeakDo not use penile skin grafts or flaps in failed FHR patients with lichen sclerosus or scarred skin.Strong 