7.3. Follow-up: After local treatment with curative intent. 7.3.1. Definition Local treatment is defined as RP or RT, either by IMRT plus IGRT or LDR- or HDR-BT, or any combination of these, including neoadjuvant and adjuvant hormonal therapy. Unestablished alternative treatments such as HIFU, cryosurgery and focal therapy options do follow the general principles as presented in this section. In general, a confirmed rising PSA is considered a sign of disease recurrence. 7.3.2. Why follow-up? The first post-treatment clinic visit focuses on detecting treatment-related complications and assist patients in coping with their new situation apart from providing information on the pathological analysis. Men with PCa are at increased risk of depression and attention for mental health status is required [1288,1289]. Tumour or patient characteristics may prompt changing the follow-up schedule. Follow-up also allows the introduction of additional / salvage treatments should that be considered necessary in light of the expected life-expectancy, patients symptoms and EAU risk categories for biochemical recurrence (See 6.1 And Table 4.3) 7.3.3. How to follow-up? The procedures indicated at follow-up visits vary according to the clinical situation. A disease-specific history is mandatory at every follow-up visit and includes psychological aspects, signs of disease progression, and treatment-related complications. Evaluation of treatment-related complications in the post-treatment period is highlighted in Sections 8.2. The examinations used for cancer-related follow-up after curative surgery or RT are discussed below. 7.3.3.1.Prostate-specific antigen monitoring Measurement of PSA is the cornerstone of follow-up after local treatment. While PSA thresholds depend on the local treatment used, PSA recurrence almost always precedes clinical recurrence [896,1290]. The key question is to establish when a PSA rise is clinically significant since not all PSA increases have the same clinical value (see Section 6.4.2) [898]. No prospective studies are available on the optimal timing for PSA testing and the impact on oncological outcomes. 7.3.3.1.1. Prostate-specific antigen monitoring after radical prostatectomy Following RP, the PSA level is expected to be undetectable. Biochemical recurrence is any rising PSA after prostatectomy as defined in Section 6.3. Prostate-specific antigen level is expected to be undetectable two months after a RP [1291]. Prostate-specific antigen is generally determined every six months until three years and yearly thereafter but the evidence for a specific interval is low [489] and mainly based on the observation that early recurrences are more likely to be associated with more rapid progression [898,1292,1293]. A rising PSA may occur after longer intervals up to 20 years after treatment and depends on the initial risk group [820]. A yearly PSA after three years is considered adequate considering the fact that a longer interval to BCR is correlated with a lower EAU-BCR risk score but around 50% of recurrence should be expected beyond three years, follow-up should be terminated if life expectancy drops < 10 years. As mentioned in Section 6.4.2 no definitive threshold can be given for relapse after RP. Persistently measurable PSA in patients treated with RP is discussed in Section 6.3.6. Ultrasensitive PSA assays remain controversial for routine follow-up after RP. Men with a PSA nadir < 0.01 ng/mL have a high (96%) likelihood of remaining relapse-free within two years [1294]. In addition, post-RP PSA levels > 0.01 ng/mL in combination with clinical characteristics such as ISUP grade group and surgical margin status may predict PSA progression and can be useful to establish follow-up intervals [1293]. However, up to 86% of men were reported to have PSA values below 0.2 ng/mL at five years after an initial PSA nadir below 0.1 ng/mL within six months after surgery [1295]. 7.3.3.1.2. Prostate-specific antigen monitoring after radiotherapy Following RT, PSA drops more slowly as compared to post RP. A PSA nadir < 0.5 ng/mL is associated with a favourable outcome after RT although the optimal cut-off value remains controversial [1296]. The interval before reaching the PSA nadir can be up to three years, or more. At the 2006 RTOG-ASTRO Consensus Conference the Phoenix definition of radiation failure was proposed to establish a better correlation between definition and clinical outcome (mainly metastases), namely, an increase of 2 ng/mL above the post-treatment PSA nadir [897]. This definition also applies to patients who received ADT [897]. 7.3.3.2. Digital rectal examination Local recurrence after curative treatment is possible without a concomitant rise in PSA level although very rarely [1297]. This has only been proven in patients with unfavourable undifferentiated tumours. Prostate specific antigen and DRE comprise the most useful combination for first-line examination in follow-up after RT but the role of DRE was questioned since it failed to detect any local recurrence in the absence of a rising PSA in a series of 899 patients [1298]. In a series of 1,118 prostatectomy patients, no local histologically proven recurrence was found by DRE alone and PSA measurement may be the most efficient test needed after RP [1299,1300]. 7.3.3.3. Transrectal ultrasound, bone scintigraphy, CT, MRI and PET/CT Imaging techniques have no place in routine follow-up of localised PCa as long as the PSA is not rising. Imaging is only justified in patients for whom the findings will affect treatment decisions, either in case of BCR or in patients with symptoms (see Section 6.4.4.3 for a more detailed discussion). 7.3.3.4. Functional follow-up All local treatments for PCa may cause short- and long-term side effect of various degree that will affect the patients’ QoL. For quality control, and in order to help the patient in choosing the optimal treatment for him, it is essential that the functional outcomes of any treatment given is measured and registered by validated and reproducable methods. In order to adress side effects and their impact of QoL specific tools or ‘patient-reported outcome measures’ (PROMs) have been developed and validated for men with PCa. These questionnaires assess common issues after PCa diagnosis and treatment and generate scores which reflect the impact on perceptions of HRQoL. For further discussion on this see Section 8.3. 7.3.4. How long to follow-up? Most patients who fail treatment for PCa do so within seven years after local therapy [1243]. Patients should be followed more closely during the initial post-treatment period when risk of failure is highest. PSA measurement, disease-specific history and DRE (if considered) are recommended every six months until three years and then annually. Whether follow-up should be stopped if PSA remains undetectable (after RP) or stable (after RT) remains an unanswered question, but it seems fair that follow-up is only done to the point that if a recurrence is found the patient is fit enough for salvage therapy. Risk assessment to predict metastases-free and PCa-specific survival after recurrence after primary treatment may guide individual decisions on a need for longer follow-up [825,898,1244]. Even in men with a PSA-DT less than ten months after RP who choose to defer treatment, a median MFS of 192 months and OS of 204 months from RP was observed, indicating the relatively long disease-free intervals observed in men with a rising PSA after local treatment [1301]. Symptomatic recurrence without a PSA rise is extremely rare, however, the symptoms typical for recurrent disease may vary and are poorly defined by published data. In case of the following symptoms PSA testing should be performed to exclude a possible cancer recurrence in particular in men not followed up by regular testing of their PSA levels: pelvic/skeletal pain, haematuria, progressive LUTS, progressive lower body oedema, progressive bowel complaints or complaints of fatigue, sarcopenia or unexplained weight loss [1302]. 7.3.5. Summary of evidence and guidelines for follow-up after treatment with curative intent Summary of evidenceLEA detectable PSA, indicating a relaps of the disease, must be differentiated from a clinically meaningful relapse. The PSA threshold that best predicts further metastases after RP is > 0.4 ng/mL and > NADIR + 2 ng/mL after IMRT/VMAT plus IGRT (± ADT).3 RecommendationsStrength ratingRoutinely follow-up asymptomatic patients by obtaining at least a disease-specific history and a prostate-specific antigen measurement.StrongAt recurrence, only perform imaging if the result will affect treatment planning.Strong 