7.4. Follow-up: During first line hormonal treatment (androgen sensitive period). 7.4.1. Introduction Androgen deprivation therapy is used in various situations: combined with RT for localised or locally-advanced disease, as monotherapy for a relapse after a local treatment, or in the presence of metastatic disease often in combination with other treatments. All these situations are based on the benefits of testosterone blockage or suppression either by drugs (LHRH agonists or antagonists) or orchidectomy. Inevitably, the disease will become castrateresistant, although ADT will be maintained. This section addresses the general principles of follow-up of patients on ADT alone. Section 6.5.3 includes further information on other drug treatments. Furthermore the specific follow-up needed for every single drug is outside the scope of this text, as is follow-up after chemotherapy. To detect disease- and treatment-related complaints, regular clinical follow-up is mandatory and cannot be replaced by imaging or laboratory tests alone. 7.4.2. Purpose of follow-up The main objectives of follow-up in patients receiving ADT are to ensure treatment compliance, to monitor treatment response, to detect side effects early, and to guide treatment at the time point of clinical progression. After the initiation of ADT, it is recommended that patients are evaluated every three to six months. This must be individualised and each patient should be advised to contact his physician in the event of troublesome symptoms. This is even more important for patients who receive a combination of ADT and other potent medication, e.g., ARPI where the frequency of follow-up is monthly for the first three months, for their disease. 7.4.3. General follow-up of men on ADT Patients under ADT require regular follow-up, including monitoring of serum testosterone, creatinine, liver function and metabolic parameters at three to six month intervals. Men on ADT can experience toxicity independent of their disease stage. Androgen deprivation therapy reduces bone density gradually, increasing the risk of fractures [1303]. It is therefore essential to asses bone density before and during treatment with ADT with or without a combination with other drugs. As the consequenses of ADT are so varying, a structured follow-up including lab results, radiology and QoL, may be of value both for the patient and for the treating physician [1304]. 7.4.3.1. Testosterone monitoring Testosterone monitoring should be considered standard clinical practice in men on ADT. Many men receiving medical castration will achieve a castrate testosterone level (< 20 ng/dL), and most a testosterone level < 50 ng/dL. However, approximately 13–38% of patients fail to achieve these levels and up to 24% of men may experience temporary testosterone surges (testosterone > 50 ng/dL) during long-term treatment [1291] referred to as ‘acute on-chronic effect’ or ‘breakthrough response’ [1305]. Breakthrough rates for the < 20 ng/dL threshold were found to be more frequent (41.3%) and an association with worse clinical outcomes was suggested [1305]. The timing of measurements is not clearly defined. A three to six month testosterone level assessment has been suggested to ensure castration is achieved (especially during medical castration) and maintained. In case a castrate testosterone level is not reached, switching to another agonist or antagonist or to an orchiectomy should be considered. In patients with a confirmed rising PSA and/or clinical progression, serum testosterone must be evaluated in all cases to confirm a castration-resistant state. Ideally, suboptimal testosterone castrate levels should be confirmed with an appropriate assay [1306,1307]. After ADT cessation (intermittent treatment or temporary ADT use as with EBRT) testosterone recovery is dependent on patients age and the duration of ADT [1308,1309]. 7.4.3.2. Liver function monitoring Liver function tests will detect treatment toxicity (especially applicable for NSAA), but rarely indicate disease progression. Men on combined ADT should have their transaminase levels checked at least yearly but in particular in the first six months of treatment initiation since liver function disorders were observed relatively early in the majority of patients in larger trials [1310]. In view of potential liver toxicity a more frequent check is needed with some drugs (including abiraterone acetate) [1311]. Alkaline phosphatase may increase secondary to bone metastases and androgen-induced osteoporosis, therefore it may be helpful to determine bone-specific isoenzymes as none are directly influenced by ADT [1312]. 7.4.3.3. Serum creatinine and haematological parameters Estimated glomerular filtration rate monitoring is good clinical practice as an increase may be linked to ureteral obstruction or bladder retention. A decline in haemoglobin is a known side effect of ADT. A significant decline after three months of ADT is independently associated with shorter progression-free and OS rates and might explain significant fatigue although other causes should be considered [1313]. Anaemia is often multi-factorial and other possible aetiologies should be excluded. An early decrease in haemoglobin three months after ADT initiation predicted better survival whereas a decrease beyond six months was associated with poor outcome in the SPCG-5 population [1314]. Radiotherapy to more extensive bone metastases locations may result in myelosuppression and haematological toxicity [1315,1316]. 7.4.3.4. Monitoring of metabolic complications The most severe complications of androgen suppression are metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular morbidity, mental health problems, and bone resorption (see Section 8.2.5). All patients should be screened for diabetes by checking fasting glucose and HbA1c (at baseline and routinely) in addition to checking blood lipid levels. Men with impaired glucose tolerance and/or diabetes should be referred for an endocrine consultation. Prior to starting ADT a cardiology consultation should be considered in men with a history of cardiovascular disease and in men older than 65 years. Men on ADT are at increased risk of cardiovascular problems and hypertension and regular checks are required [1317]. More profound androgen ablation resulted in a higher cardiovascular toxicity [1318] and cardio-respiratory fitness decreased even after six months of ADT [1319]. The prematurely closed PRONOUNCE study found no difference at twelve months in major adverse cardiovascular events between men receiving degarelix or leuprolide [1320]. 7.4.3.5. Monitoring bone problems Androgen deprivation therapy increases the risk of osteoporosis. A combination of ADT with apalutamide, darolutamide, enzalutamide, abiraterone plus prednisone or docetaxel increases the fracture risk even more [1123,1321,1322]. Administration of ADT for more than a year, as compared to less than one year, showed a higher risk of osteoporosis (HR: 1.77 and 1.38, respectively) [1323]. Several scores (e.g., Fracture Risk Assessment Tool [FRAX score], Osteoporosis Self-Assessment Tool [OST], Osteoporosis Risk Assessment Instrument [ORAI], Osteoporosis Index of Risk [OSIRIS], Osteoporosis Risk Estimation [SCORE]) can help identify men at risk of osteoporotic complications but validation of these scores in the ADT setting is required (see Section 8.3.2.2) [1221,1324,1325]. Routine bone monitoring for osteoporosis should be performed at the start of ADT using dual emission X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan [1222,1326,1327]. Presence of osteoporosis should prompt the use of bone protective agents. The criteria for initiation of bone protective agents are mentioned in Section 8.3.2.2. If no bone protective agents are given, a DEXA scan should be done regularly, at least every two years [1328]. A review summarising the incidence of bone fractures showed an almost doubling of the risk of fractures when using ADT depending on patients’ age and duration and type of ADT with the highest incidence in older men and men on additional novel ARPI medication across the entire spectrum of disease [1329]. In case of an osteoporotic fracture a bone protective agent is mandatory. Vitamin D and calcium levels should be regularly monitored when patients receive ADT and patients should be supplemented if needed (see Section 8.3.2.2). 7.4.3.6. Monitoring lifestyle, cognition, fatigue and sexual function Lifestyle (e.g., diet, exercise, smoking status, etc.) affects QoL and potentially outcome [1312]. During follow-up men should be counselled on the beneficial effects of exercise to avoid ADT-related toxicity [1330]. Androgen deprivation therapy may affect mental and cognitive health and men on ADT are three times more likely to report depression [1331]. Attention to mental health should therefore be an integral part of the follow-up scheme. Men on ADT may experience complaints of fatigue possibly related to systemic inflammation [1332]. Reduced cognitive performance and fatigue may arise within six months after initiation of ADT but can improve over time [1333]. Another apect of starting ADT is that it leads to sexual dysfunction, causing > 80% of couples to cease sexual activity completely. This aspect affects patients as well as their partners and couple counselling should be considered [1334]. 7.4.4. Methods of follow-up in men on ADT without metastases 7.4.4.1. Prostate-specific antigen monitoring Prostate-specific antigen is a key marker for following the course of androgen-sensitive non-metastasised PCa. Imaging should be considered when PSA is rising > 2 ng/mL or in case of symptoms suggestive of metastasis. 7.4.4.2. Imaging In general, asymptomatic patients with a stable PSA level do not require further imaging, although care needs to be taken in patients with aggressive variants when PSA levels may not reflect tumour progression [1335]. New bone pain requires at least targeted imaging and potentially a bone scan. When PSA progression suggests CRPC status and treatment modification is considered, imaging, by means of a bone and CT scan, is recommended for restaging. Detection of metastases greatly depends on imaging (see Section 5.8). 7.4.5. Methods of follow-up in men under ADT for hormone-sensitive metastatic PCa In metastatic patients it is of the utmost importance to counsel about early signs of spinal cord compression, urinary tract complications (ureteral obstruction, bladder outlet obstruction) or bone lesions that are at an increased fracture risk. The intervals for follow-up in M1 patients should be guided by patients’ complaints and can vary. Since most men will receive another anti-cancer therapy combined with ADT such as ARPI, chemotherapy ,local RT, or combinations, follow-up frequency should also be dependent on the treatment modality. The specific points related to follow-up during the castrate-resistant situation are detailed in Section 6.7.9. 7.4.5.1. PSA monitoring In men on ADT alone, a PSA decline to < 4 ng/mL suggests a likely prolonged response and follow-up visits may be scheduled every three to six months provided the patient is asymptomatic or clinically improving. This applied to men on ADT monotherapy as well as after ADT plus docetaxel [1094]. Depending on symptoms and risk assessment, more frequent visits may be indicated. Treatment response may be evaluated based on a change in serum PSA level [1093,1094] and bone- and CT scan although there is no consensus about how frequently these should be performed [1268]. A rise in PSA level usually precedes the onset of clinical symptoms by several months. A rising PSA should prompt assessment of testosterone level, which is mandatory to define CRPC status, as well as restaging using imaging. However, it is now recognised that a stable PSA during ADT is not enough to characterise a non-progressive situation [1336]. 7.4.5.2. Imaging as a marker of response in metastatic PCa Treatment response in soft-tissue metastases can be assessed by morphological imaging methods using the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (RECIST) criteria. However, these criteria cannot be used in bone where response assessment is difficult [1337,1338]. When bone scan is used to follow bone metastases, a quantitative estimation of tracer uptake at bone scan can be obtained through automated methods such as the Bone Scan Index [1339]. Nonetheless, bone scan is limited by the so-called ‘flare’ phenomenon which is defined by the development of new images induced by treatment on a first follow-up scan which, after longer observation, actually represent a favourable response. Flare is observed within eight to twelve weeks of treatment initiation and can lead to a false-positive diagnosis of disease progression. Computed tomography cannot be used to monitor sclerotic bone lesions because bone sclerosis can occur under effective treatment and reflects bone healing. Magnetic resonance imaging can directly assess the bone marrow and demonstrate progression based on morphologic criteria or changes in apparent diffusion coefficient. A standardisation for reporting is available [1340]. The ability of PET/CT to assess response has been evaluated in a few studies. Until further data are available, MRI and PET/CT should not be used outside trials for treatment monitoring in metastatic patients [1341]. Men with metastasised PCa on ADT should also in the absence of a PSA rise be followed up with regular imaging since twenty-five percent of men with, or without, docetaxel in the CHAARTED trial developed clinical progression without a PSA rise [1336]. One in eight men with a PSA < 2 ng/mL showed clinical progression [1336]. The addition of docetaxel to ADT in the CHAARTED trial population did not reduce the incidence of clinical progression at low PSA values and this rate was similar for both low- and high-volume disease as per CHAARTED criteria [1336]. However, the optimal timing and image modality to be used remain unclear, as is the real clinical value of any findings. 7.4.6. Guidelines for follow-up during hormonal treatment RecommendationsStrength ratingThe follow-up strategy must be individualised based on stage of disease, prior symptoms, prognostic factors and the treatment given.StrongIn patients with stage M0 disease, schedule follow-up at least every six months. As a minimum requirement, include a disease-specific history, serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) determination, as well as liver and renal function in the diagnostic work-up.StrongIn M1 patients, schedule follow-up at least every three to six months.StrongIn patients on long-term androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), measure initial bone mineral density to assess fracture risk.StrongIn patients receiving combination treatment for offer bone protection to avoid fracturesStrongDuring follow-up of patients receiving ADT, check PSA and testosterone levels and monitor patients for symptoms associated with metabolic syndrome as a side effect of ADT.StrongIn patients on long-term ADT, as a minimum requirement, include a disease-specific history, haemoglobin, serum creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, lipid profiles and HbA1c level measurements.StrongCounsel patients (especially with M1b status) about the clinical signs suggestive of spinal cord compression.StrongWhen disease progression is suspected, restaging is needed and the subsequent follow-up adapted/individualised.StrongIn patients with suspected progression, assess the testosterone level. By definition, castration-resistant PCa requires a testosterone level < 50 ng/dL (< 1.7 nmol/L).Strong 