hronic pain syndromes, as described throughout these guidelines. In men with pain post inguinal hernia repair, there is limited evidence from case series showing that neurectomy of the damaged nerves can lead to symptomatic benefit [185,414]. For scrotal pain post vasectomy, affected men may find that reversal of vasectomy can cure symptoms especially in those in whom patency is achieved [415]. In a prospective RCT, pulsed radio-frequency to the ilioinguinal and genitofemoral nerves is associated with high rates of symptomatic improvement (80%) but follow up was limited to three months [416]. The evidence for epididymectomy is poor but if considered, is less likely to provide benefit if the epididymis has a normal sonographic appearance [417]. Chronic gynaecological pain It is difficult to compare the wide variation of drugs from an efficacy and safety perspective as they have such diverse uses/indications. In those gynaecological patients where chronic pelvic pain is unrelated to any of the well-defined conditions, it is often difficult to determine a therapeutic pathway other than a multidisciplinary chronic abdomino-pelvic pain management plan. A Cochrane review suggests there may be some evidence (moderate) supporting the use of progestogens [340]. Though efficacious, physicians need to be knowledgeable of progestogenic side effects (e.g., weight gain, bloatedness - the most common adverse effects) which can stop some patients from accepting such medication. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), such as goserelin, are also thought to help such pain. However, when compared with progestogens, their efficacy remains limited. The quality of evidence is generally low and drawn from single studies [340]. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone on the other hand binds to specific receptors on pituitary gonadotrophs, leading to desensitisation and consequently to suppressed gonadotropin secretion. By contrast, GnRH antagonists compete with GnRH for receptors thus gonadotrophin secretion, which may be beneficial in certain clinical applications, such as reducing the size of fibroids, endometrial bleeding and endometriosis [418]. Pelvic Floor, Abdominal and Chronic Anal PainBotulinum toxin type A (pelvic floor) Pelvic floor muscle over-activity plays a role in CPPPS. Botulinum toxin type A, as a muscle relaxant, can be used to reduce the resting pressure of the pelvic floor muscles and injection of the puborectalis and pubococcygeus muscles has been used to treat spasm of the levator ani A pilot study of twelve women with pelvic floor muscle overactivity as defined by a vaginal resting pressure > 40 cm H2O on vaginal manometry reported a reduction in resting pressure with improvement in dyspareunia and dysmenorrhoea, but no significant changes in non-menstrual pelvic pain scores [419]. A SR including three RCTs comparing BTX-A with saline injections into the pelvic floor found no benefit in pain scores at six months follow-up despite a reduction in pelvic floor pressure [385]. Botulinum toxin type A has been injected into trigger points. It is more expensive than lidocaine and has not been proven to be more effective [420]. Reviews do not support the injection of BTX-A into trigger points [421]. Botulinum toxin type A can also be injected at the sphincter level to improve urination or defecation. Relaxation of the urethral sphincter alleviates bladder problems and secondarily the spasm. In a cohort study of thirteen patients with CPPPS, BTX-A was injected into the external urethral sphincter. Subjectively, eleven patients reported a substantial change in pain symptoms, from a score of 7.2 to 1.6 on a VAS [422]. Intermittent chronic primary anal pain syndrome Due to the short duration of the episodes, medical treatment and prevention is often not feasible. Inhaled β-2 adrenergic agonist salbutamol was effective in an RCT in patients with frequent symptoms and shortened pain duration [423]. Other treatment options are topic diltiazem and BTX-A [424]. However, there is still some controversy regarding the duration of pain of intermittent chronic and chronic primary anal pain syndrome. Randomised controlled trials often use different definitions, extending the pain duration (with a shift to chronic pain) in order to include more patients and to better evaluate the study-drug action. Abdominal pain associated with Irritable Bowel Syndrome Linaclotide, a minimally absorbed peptide guanylate cyclase-C agonist at a dose of 290 μg once daily significantly improved abdominal pain (48.9% vs. 34.5% placebo-treated) and bowel symptoms associated with IBS with constipation over 26 weeks of treatment [425]. Diarrhoea was the most common adverse event in patients treated with linaclotide (4.5%). Although it is known to overlap with IBS pelvic pain, effect on the latter was not assessed in this study. In a Cochrane Meta-analysis antispasmodics had a beneficial effect for improvement of abdominal pain compared to placebo (58% improved on antispasmodic compared to 46% on placebo) in IBS [426]. Peppermint oil showed in a meta-analysis of nine RCT’s improvement in abdominal pain in patients with IBS [427]. 