cation [391]. Drowsiness is a limiting factor with amitriptyline, nortriptyline is sometimes considered instead. Pentosane polysulphate Pentosan polysulphate is a semi-synthetic drug manufactured from beech-wood hemicellulose. Subjective improvement of pain, urgency, frequency, but not nocturia, has been reported [392,393]. Pentosane polysulphate had a more favourable effect in PBPS type 3 C than in non-lesion disease [394]. Response was not dose dependent but related more to treatment duration. At 32 weeks, about half the patients responded. Combination therapy showed a RR of 40% compared to 13% with placebo. For patients with an initial minor response to pentosane polysulphate, additional subcutaneous heparin was helpful [395,396]. Immunosuppressants Azathioprine treatment has resulted in disappearance of pain and urinary frequency [397]. Initial evaluation of methotrexate [398] showed good analgesic effect but limited efficacy for urgency and frequency. Corticosteroids are not recommended in the management of patients with PBPS because of a lack of evidence. Intravesical Treatments Intravesical drugs are administered due to poor oral bio-availability establishing high drug concentrations within the bladder, with few systemic side-effects. Disadvantages include the need for intermittent catheterisation which can be painful in PBPS patients, cost and risk of infection. Local anaesthetics There are sporadic reports of successful treatment of PBPS with intravesical lidocaine [399,400]. Alkalisation of lidocaine improves its pharmacokinetics [401]. Combination of heparin, lidocaine and sodium bicarbonate gave immediate symptom relief in 94% of patients and sustained relief after two weeks in 80% [402]. Intravesical instillation of alkalised lidocaine or placebo for five consecutive days resulted in significantly sustained symptom relief for up to one month [403]. Hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sulphate These are described to repair defects in the GAG layer. Despite the fact that intravesical GAG replenishment has been in use for about twenty years for PBPS/IC, most of the studies are uncontrolled and with a small number of patients. Based on the studies available there are differences by virtue of substance classes, whether they are natural GAG layer components, dosage formulations, or concentrations. An RCT seems to reinforce the case for GAG layer replenishment, however it lacks a placebo arm [404]. A meta-analysis confirms usefulness of GAG layer replenishment [412]. However, most retrieved studies are non-randomised and with scarce numbers. Intravesical heparin Primary bladder pain syndrome patients were treated with heparin for three months, and over half had control of symptoms, with continued improvement after one year of therapy [405]. Intravesical heparin plus peripheral neuromodulation in patients with refractory PBPS was studied and it was shown that voiding frequency, pain score and maximum cystometric capacity were significantly better after two and twelve months [406]. Hyperbaric oxygen This has a moderate effect on a small subgroup of PBPS patients. Disadvantages include high cost, limited availability of treatment sites, and time-consuming treatment [395]. Treatments of limited value for PBPSCimetidine There are limited data to suggest that cimetidine improves symptoms of PBPS in the short-term. Compared with placebo for three months, cimetidine significantly improved symptom scores, pain and nocturia, although the bladder mucosa showed no histological changes in either group [407]. Prostaglandins Misoprostol is a prostaglandin that regulates various immunological cascades. After three months of treatment with misoprostol, fourteen out of 25 patients had significantly improved, with twelve showing a sustained response after a further six months [408]. The incidence of adverse drug effects was 64%. L-Arginine Oral treatment with the nitric oxide (NO) synthase substrate L-arginine was suggested to decrease PBPS-related symptoms. However, no symptomatic relief or change in NO production could be shown after treatment [409,410]. Oxybutynin is an anti-cholinergic drug used in overactive detrusor dysfunction. Intravesical oxybutynin combined with bladder training improves functional bladder capacity, volume at first sensation, and cystometric bladder capacity [411]. However, an effect on pain has not been reported. Duloxetine (a serotonin-noradrenaline re-uptake inhibitor antidepressant with a licence for the management of neuropathic pain) did not significantly improve symptoms of PBPS [412]. Administration was safe. Based on these preliminary data, duloxetine cannot be recommended for treatment of PBPS. PDE5 inhibitors are drugs currently used for erectile dysfunction. In different RCT improved all parameters evaluated at twelve weeks, but at 24 weeks results were not consistent for pain VAS score [413]. Using a PDE5i, theoretically, the activation of C fiber is decreased, bladder afferent activity is reduced and detrusor muscle tone relaxes. Primary Scrotal Pain Syndrome (PSPS) Treatment of primary scrotal pain syndrome is based on the principles of treating c