3.1.5.2. Underlying causes. The mechanisms that serve as an underlying cause for chronic pelvic pain are: Ongoing acute pain mechanisms [55] (such as those associated with inflammation or infection), which may involve somatic or visceral tissue.Chronic pain mechanisms, which especially involve the CNS [6].Emotional, cognitive, behavioural and sexual responses and mechanisms [56,57] Symptoms and signs of neuropathic pain appear to be common in CPPPS patients and assessment of neuropathic pain should be considered in that group of patients including those with secondary pelvic pain and other pelvic pathologies [58]. Chronic pain mechanisms may include altered resting state neuromotor connectivity, for instance in men with chronic prostatitis/CPPPS [59]. Table 3 illustrates some of the differences between the somatic and visceral pain mechanisms. These underlie some of the mechanisms that may produce the classical features of visceral pain; in particular, referred pain and hyperalgesia. Table 3: Comparison between visceral and somatic pain Visceral painSomatic painEffective painful stimuliStretching and distension, producing poorly localised pain.Mechanical, thermal, chemical and electrical stimuli, producing well localised pain.SummationWidespread stimulation produces significantly magnified pain.Widespread stimulation produces a modest increase in pain.Autonomic involvementAutonomic features (e.g., nausea and sweating) frequently present.Autonomic features less frequent.Referred painPain perceived at a site distant to the cause of the pain is common.Pain is relatively well localised and well recognised.Referred hyperalgesiaReferred cutaneous and muscle hyperalgesia is common, as is involvement of other visceral organs.Hyperalgesia tends to be localised.InnervationLow density, unmyelinated C fibres and thinly myelinated A∂ fibres.Dense innervation with a wide range of nerve fibres.Primary afferent physiologyIntensity coding. As stimulation increases, afferent firing increases with an increase in sensation and ultimately pain.Two fibre coding. Separate fibres for pain and normal sensation.Silent afferents50-90% of visceral afferents are silent until the time they are switched on.These fibres are very important in the central sensitisation process. Silent afferents present, but form a lower percentage.Central mechanismsPlay an important part in the hyperalgesia, viscero-visceral, viscero-muscular and musculo-visceral hyperalgesia.Sensations not normally perceived become perceived and non-noxious sensations become painful. Responsible for the allodynia and hyperalgesia of chronic somatic pain.Abnormalities of functionCentral mechanisms associated with visceral pain may be responsible for organ dysfunction.Somatic pain associated with somatic dysfunction, e.g., muscle spasm.Central pathways and representationAs well as classical pathways, there is evidence for a separate dorsal horn pathway and central representation.Classical pain pathways. Ongoing peripheral pain mechanisms in visceral pain In most cases of chronic pelvic pain, ongoing tissue trauma, inflammation or infection is absent [60,61]. However, conditions that produce recurrent trauma, infection or ongoing inflammation may result in chronic pelvic pain in a small proportion of cases. For example, out of a large cohort with acute bacterial prostatitis, 10.5% ended up with a state of CPPPS [62]. It is for this reason that the early stages of assessment include looking for these pathologies. Once excluded, ongoing investigations for these causes are rarely helpful and indeed may be detrimental. When acute pain mechanisms are activated by a nociceptive event, as well as direct activation of the peripheral nociceptor transducers, sensitisation of those transducers may also occur; therefore, magnifying the afferent signalling. Afferents that are not normally active may also become activated by the change, that is, there may be activation of the so-called silent afferents. Although these are mechanisms of acute pain, the increased afferent signalling is often a trigger for the chronic pain mechanisms that maintain the perception of pain in the absence of ongoing peripheral pathology (see below) [63]. There are a number of mechanisms by which the peripheral transducers may exhibit an increase in sensibility: Modification of the peripheral tissue, which may result in the transducers being more exposed to peripheral stimulation.There may be an increase in the chemicals that stimulate the receptors of the transducers [64].There are many modifications in the receptors that result in them being more sensitive. In general, the effect of 1 and 2 above is to lower the threshold and the effect of 3 above is to increase responsiveness to external stimuli. Some of the chemicals responsible for the above changes may be released from those cells associated with inflammation, but the peripheral nervous system may also release chemicals in the positive and inhibitory loops [65,66]. Central sensitisation as a mechanism in visceral pain It is important to appreciate that nociception is the process of transmitting information to centres involved in perception of a stimulus that has the potential to cause tissue damage. Pain is far more complex and involves activation of the nociceptive pathways but also the emotional response. The brain may affect the modulation of pain pathways at the spinal cord level. Neuronal sensitisation is responsible for a decrease in threshold and an increase in response duration and magnitude of dorsal horn neurons. It is associated with an expansion of the receptive field. As a result, sensitisation increases signalling to the CNS and amplifies what we perceive from a peripheral stimulus. For example, for cutaneous stimuli, light touch would not normally produce pain, however, when central sensitisation is present, light touch may be perceived as painful (allodynia). In visceral hyperalgesia (so called because the afferents are primarily small fibres), visceral stimuli that are normally sub-threshold and not usually perceived, may be perceived and result in a sensation of fullness and a need to void or to defecate. Non-noxious stimuli may be interpreted as pain and stimuli that are normally noxious may be magnified (true hyperalgesia) with an increased perception of pain. As a consequence, one can see that many of the symptoms of PBPS and IBS may be explained by central sensitisation. A similar explanation exists for the muscle pain in FM. It is now well accepted that there are both descending pain-inhibitory and descending pain-facilitatory pathways that originate from the brain [67]. Several neurotransmitters and neuromodulators are involved in descending pain-inhibitory pathways. The main ones are the opioids, 5-hydroxytryptamine and noradrenaline. The autonomic nervous system also plays a role in sensitisation. There is good evidence that damaged afferent fibres may develop a sensitivity to sympathetic stimulation, both at the site of injury and more centrally, particularly in the dorsal horns. In visceral pain, the efferent output of the CNS may be influenced by central changes (again, those changes may be throughout the neuraxis), and such modification of the efferent message may produce significant end-organ dysfunction. These functional abnormalities can have a significant effect on QoL and must be managed as appropriate. Psychological mechanisms in visceral pain Psychological processes of emotions, thought and behaviour involve networks rather than distinct centres. Some of these processes are sophisticated and others fundamental in evolutionary terms, and their interaction with pain processing is complex. Various psychological processes affect pain neuromodulation at a higher level. Inhibiting or facilitating both the strength of the nociceptive signal reaching the consciousness and appraisal and interpretation of that signal, will also modulate the response to the nociceptive message and hence the pain experience. Further, descending pathways represent cognitive, emotional and behavioural states at spinal and peripheral levels. The psychological modulation of visceral pain probably involves multiple pathways: for instance, mood and attentional focus probably act through different areas of the brain when involved in reducing pain [68]. This psychological modulation may act to reduce nociception within a rapid time frame but may also result in long-term vulnerability to chronic visceral pain, through long-term potentiation. This involvement of higher centre learning may be at both a conscious and subconscious level, and is clearly significant in the supratentorial neuroprocessing of nociception and pain. Long-term potentiation [69] may occur at any level within the nervous system, so that pathways for specific or combinations of stimuli may become established, resulting in an individual being vulnerable to feeling pain from sensations that would not normally be experienced as painful. An important review [31] of chronic pelvic pain in women dismantled the notion that women without relevant physical findings differ in psychological characteristics from women with relevant physical findings. Women with pelvic pain often have other non-pain somatic symptoms and current or lifetime anxiety and depression disorder [22]; they may have a history of physical or sexual abuse in childhood; but this is of unclear significance. Studies should avoid interpreting the absence of physical findings as evidence for psychological origins of the complaint (‘psychosomatic’ or ‘somatoform’ disorders). Pain studies describe multiple processes by which pain may spread across sites, or in time, including central sensitisation (see previous section), viscero-visceral cross sensitisation in relation to multiple pain sites [70], activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and dysregulation of serotonergic pathways [71] that can render pain levels responsive to stress. Some pain problems which affect sexual activity are diagnosed as sexual problems (e.g., ‘dyspareunia’) when pain is the central problem and is not contingent on sexual activity alone [72]. Better integration of sexology and mainstream psychology for pelvic pain in both men and women is needed, building on a biopsychosocial formulation [73,74]. The term psychosomatic symptoms can best be understood as multiple somatic symptoms not associated with, or indicative of, any serious disease process. Medical and surgical history may also be important [75]. Understanding the psychological components of pain Psychological processes of emotions, thought and behaviour involve distributed networks, whose interactions with pain processing are complex, producing inhibition and facilitation of signal processing, appraisal, and response. Models that integrate psychological factors involved in maintaining persistent pelvic and urogenital pain with current neurobiological understanding of pain are few, but the quality is high (see Section 3.1.5.1). There is no evidence that women with CPPPS without physical findings are primarily presenting a psychological problem [31]. Anxiety and post-traumatic stress symptoms are common in some women with CPPPS [23,76] and with vulvar pain [77], and may account for substantial variance in health status, treatment use and treatment outcome; for instance, women’s expectations about vulvar pain on penetration predicted pain, sexual function and sexual satisfaction [78]. Negative investigative findings do not necessarily resolve women’s anxieties about the cause of pain [79,80] and anxiety often focuses on what might be ‘wrong’. Depression may be related to pain in various ways, as described above. Until measures are available that are adequately standardised in patients with pain, assessment of anxiety and distress requires questions about the patient’s beliefs about the cause of pain, the hope that diagnosis will validate pain, the struggle with unpredictability, and the implications of pain for everyday life [81,82]. Reference to the studies of the IMMPACT group [83] is recommended for guidance on outcome measures suitable for pain trials. Stress can modify the nervous system to produce long-term biological changes. These structural changes may be responsible for significant early life and adverse life events which are associated later with chronic pain syndromes [33]. The patient should be asked about adverse life events that may produce these biological responses and affect general psychological well-being [33,84]. 