3.18.3. Current classification of DSD conditions. There have been a number of published updates since the International Consensus Conference on ‘intersex’ and its subsequent publications on the classification of the various conditions of DSD. The latest of these was published by the Global DSD Update Consortium in 2016 [1262]. As the field of DSD is continuously developing, and knowledge and viewpoints change over time, an effort has been made to to consider diversity, inclusion, and equality, and therefore representatives from support and advocacy groups continue to be invited, with an aim to focus on patient care and the best possible quality of life. According to the international consensus in 2005, DSDs have been defined as congenital conditions within which the development of chromosomal, gonadal and/or anatomic sex is atypical. The changes that were made according to terminology are as follows: 46XX DSD – This was formerly termed female pseudohermaphrodite, over-virilisation of an XX female, and masculinisation of an XX female. In this group the vast majority is due to classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) with various degrees of masculinisation. Among all DSD conditions together, 46XX CAH patients comprise approximately 80% cases. These conditions are extremely important since they can be potentially life threatening days after birth due to a salt-loss phenomenon, and immediate medical care is mandatory. 46XY DSD – Previously termed male pseudohermaphroditism, undervirilisation of an XY male, and undermasculinisation of an XY male. This group is often quite heterogenous and includes the partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS), as well as the complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) formerly called testicular feminisation. Sex chromosome mosaicism DSD (45X; 45X/46XY; 47XXY) – This cohort consists of multiple variants with the mixed gonadal dysgenesis being the most important one. Many have a normal male phenotype and others may have asymmetric genitalia. One scrotal half often contains a gonad which is likely to be a testis whereas the other side is more in keeping with a labia majora with usually no palpable gonad, which will most likely be a streak gonad. Ovotesticular DSD – This was previously described as a ‘true hermaphrodite’ because of the presence of ovarian and testicular tissue co-existing in the same individual meaning. There is great variability in phenotype with uni- or bilateral undescended gonads, which can present as one ovary and one testis, or as one or two ovotestes. Non-hormonal/non-chromosomal DSD – This cohort was introduced as well, including newborns with cloacal exstrophy where bladder and intestines are exposed through a midline mesenchymal defect resulting from the failure of the clocal membrane to retract, which then rutpures. Others in this cohort include patients with aphallia, and severe micropenis. The latter one is a normally formed penis with a stretched length of < 2.5 standard deviation below the mean [1251,1263]. Micropenis should be distinguished from buried and webbed penis, which are usually of normal size. The length of the penis is measured on the dorsal aspect, while stretching the penis, from the pubic symphysis to the tip of the glans [1251]. 