3.18.6. Risk of tumour development. The dysgenetic gonads of individuals with DSD have an increased risk of developing germ cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS), previously known as carcinoma in situ, and overt germ cell cancer (GCC) as compared to the general population [1275]. The highest prevalence of GCC is seen in conditions characterised by disturbed gonadal development and in the presence of the Y chromosome or parts thereof (SRY & GBY encompassing regions) [1276]. In a large dsd-LIFE study the overall prevalence of neoplastic lesions was 12%. Subanalysis demonstrated a significantly higher prevalence of 36% in patients with 46 XY gonadal dysgenesis as compared with other DSD subtypes [1277]. Conversely, patients with testosterone biosynthesis disorders and androgen action disturbances (46XY DSD group) have a much lower risk (1-15%) for GCNIS development during childhood and had a limited tendency towards invasive progression of the lesions. It has been hyposthesised that a certain level of testosterone activity seems to be needed for GCNIS to progress to overt malignancy [1278,1279]. An overview of the risks of malignancy in different subtypes of DSD is shown in Table 7. The issue of whether gonads should be removed and the timining of such surgery remains controversial and has been altogether questioned in some forms of DSD. Patients with, for example, CAIS benefit from the presence of testicles and the resultant aromatisation of the naturally occuring testosterone to oestrogens. The risk of malignant gonadal transformation in this subcategory is low (1.5%) with cases of malignancy first appearing after the second decade of life, thus allowing for the safe deferal of gonadectomy until after puberty [1279,1280]. This is however less clear for other subtypes of DSD, and needs to be assessed for each case according to several factors such as patient age, underlying DSD subtype and especially the presence of a Y chromosome. In such cases, the location of the gonad, possible fertility, hormonal potential of the gonad and the possibility of gonadal monitoring together with surgical/anaesthesic risks incurred by gonadectomy should be taken into account [1253,1272]. In general, intra-abdominal gonads have to be brought down to a superficial position or pexied to the abdominal wall to allow for monitoring, self examination and ultrasound guided biopsies. High-risk gonads that fail to be brought down, or streak-like gonads should be removed based on a risk- benefit analysis, and after appropriate inter-disciplinary review [1253,1272]. Biopsies should be reviewed by an experienced pathologist and specialised immunohistochemistry is recommended for measurement of expressions of PLAP and octamer-binding transcription factors 3 and 4, as it may be difficult to differntiate between GCNIS and delayed germ cell maturation in infants. Non-invasive markers such as serum microRNA (miRNA) for early-stage malignancy detection, have been developed, but have yet to be implemented in clinical practice [1253,1269]. Table 7: Risk of malignancy in different subtypes of DSD (Adapted from Looijenga et al., [1281]) RiskDSDMalignancy risk (%)HighGonadal dysgenesis, with Y, abdominal gonadPAIS non-scrotal gonadFrasier syndromeDenys-Drash with Y15-35506040IntermediateTurner syndrome with Y17β- hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiencyGonadal dysgenesis with YPAIS scrotal gonad1228UnknownUnknownLowComplete androgen insensitivity syndrome Ovotesticular DSDTurner syndrome without Y231No5-Alpha Reductase DeficiencyLeydig cell hyperplasia00 