3.18.5. Gender assignment. In the current climate, it goes without saying that open, honest, and complete communication with caregivers and eventually the affected person is mandatory. Educational and psychological support regarding the impact is needed for each individual to make sense of their condition, relate to their community, and establish relationships. The lack of outcome data and different preferences make it challenging to determine whether and when to pursue gonadal or genital surgery. Shared decision making is critical, combining expert healthcare knowledge and the right of a patient or caregivers to make fully informed decisions. This entails a process of education, sharing of risks/benefits, articulating the uncertainties in DSD care and outcomes in addition to providing time for the patient and family to articulate back the risks and benefits of each option. The goal of all involved should be to individualise and prioritise each patient. However, prior published adverse outcomes have led to recommendations to delay unnecessary surgery to an age when the patient can give informed consent. Surgery that alters appearance is not considered urgent. In 2017 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, the European Society for Paediatric Urology (ESPU) as well as the Societies for Pediatric Urology have taken a position in the debate on surgery for DSD [1252,1270,1271]. In an open letter to the Council of Europe, the European Society for Paediatric Urology expressed its attitude to the abovementioned resolution and concentrated on a worrying issue dealing with medicosurgical care for children with DSD. It states that surgical interventions in children with DSD only being applied in emergency conditions is discordant with the definition of health according to the WHO, stating that health is not merely the absence of disease, but is a much broader concept, including physical, mental, and social domains. This especially applies to children, as favourable physical, social and emotional conditions are all critical factors for their optimal growth and development, which enables them to reach their full potential at an adult age. As social and emotional interactions with the parents or caregivers, being the most important adults in a young child’s life, form the basis for their future, treatment of children with DSD can best be organised in a patient- and family-centred multi-disciplinary setting, in an atmosphere based on openness, commitment and trust. Physicians, who daily take care of children with a variety of congenital conditions, the same as their parents or caregivers, are committed to the current as well as the future health and well-being of all children entrusted to their care. In contrast to what is alleged in the recommendation, parents and caregivers implicitly act in the best interest of their children and should be respected as their outstanding representatives, and should not be put aside by claiming prohibition regulations regarding the well-informed decisions they make on their behalf. Finally in a published open letter, the ESPU advocate keeping dialogue open with the professionals active in specialised centres for multi-disciplinary, patient- and family-centred care as well as with patient societies, for which the present resolution is recognised as being a solid starting base [1272]. Genital surgery The decision to proceed with genital surgery is acknowledged to be controversial. Patient-reported outcomes from adult patients who previously underwent early genital surgery demonstrate considerable variation, with perspectives dependent on, but not limited to, diagnostic category, gender, prior experience with surgical procedures, and contact with support groups [1273]. The majority of patients who have undergone surgery rated their appearance as satisfactory from an anatomical perspective. However, functional results were found to be less satisfactory due to the development of vaginal stenosis, or diminished sensation in the clitoris or the glans penis [1274]. Clinical decision-making with respect to genital surgery in patients with a DSD should not be made wantonly, but advisedly, in a patient and family-centred multi-disciplinary setting, on a case-by-case basis. These decisions should be supported and audited by improving information on long-term outcomes, informed consent, and contact with support groups at both an individual and an institutional level. 