3.18.1. Introduction. Formerly called ‘intersex disorders’, this constellation of conditions has been the subject of a consensus document in which it was decided that the term ‘intersex’ should be changed to ‘disorders/differences of sex development’ (DSD), however the original term is still used in the resolution of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (see below) [1251]. The new classification has arisen due to advances in knowledge of the molecular genetic causes of abnormal sexual development, controversies inherent to clinical management, and ethical issues. Controversial and negative terminology, e.g., ‘pseudohermaphroditism’ and ‘hermaphroditism’, have been renamed according to new pathophysiological insights. Furthermore, some conditions presenting with severe male genital malformation, such as penile agenesis and cloacal exstrophy, which could not previously be categorised, have now also been included. The term ‘disorders/differences of sex development’ is proposed to indicate congenital conditions with atypical development of chromosomal, gonadal or anatomical sex. In addition to this, in 2017 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe decided on a resolution termed: “Promoting the human rights of and eliminating discrimination against intersex people” [1252]. The Assembly concluded that the majority of ‘intersex’ people (cited verbatim from the resolution) were physically healthy and that only a few suffered from medical conditions that put their health at risk. Furthermore, they stated that the prevailing medical view at that time was that the bodies of ‘intersex’ children could, and should be made to conform to either a male or a female paradigm, often through surgical and/or hormonal intervention, and that this should be performed as early as possible so that these children could then be raised in the gender corresponding to their assigned sex. The Parliamentary Assembly considered that this approach involved serious breaches of physical integrity and autonomy, with many cases concerning very young children or infants who were unable to give informed consent and whose gender identity was unknown. Therefore, the Parliamentary Assembly called on Council of Europe member states to effectively protect children’s rights to physical integrity and bodily autonomy, and to empowering ‘intersex’ people with the following rights: Medically unnecessary sex-“normalising” surgery, sterilisation and other treatments practised on ‘intersex’ children without their informed consent should be prohibited, and in addition that it has to be ensured that, except in cases where the life of the child is at immediate risk, any treatment that seeks to alter the sex characteristics of the child including their gonads, genitals or internal sex organs, is deferred until such time as the child is able to participate in the decision, based on the right to self-determination, and on the principle of free and informed consent. The Panel refers to the consensus documents mentioned above as well as on the Parliamentary Assembly resolution. This chapter will focus on what is relevant for the practising paediatric urologist, as they are likely to be involved in neonates with DSD conditions. Overall, evidence-based literature on DSD is sparse. There are no RCTs, and most studies are based on retrospective, clinical descriptive studies, or on expert opinion. An exception is made in relation to the risk of gonadal cancer, for which the level of evidence is higher [1253]. Disorders/differences of sex development can present as a prenatal diagnosis, neonatal diagnosis, or late diagnosis. Prenatal diagnosis can be based on karyotype or sonographic findings; A neonatal diagnosis is based on genital ambiguity, and a late diagnosis is usually made as a result of early or delayed puberty. In this guideline, the focus is on the neonatal presentation, where the paediatric urologist plays a more central role. There have been several publications over the last couple of decades exploring the role of prenatal corticosteroid treatment of patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The Endocrine Society still proclaims their use to be restricted to research settings, and that this treatment remains experimental [1254,1255]. For late diagnoses, we refer to endocrinology and gynaecology guidelines on precocious and delayed puberty, where paediatric urologists play a less central role [1256,1257]. Dealing with neonates with DSD requires a multi-disciplinary approach, which should ideally include geneticists, neonatologists, paediatric and adult endocrinologists, paediatric urologists, gynaecologists, psychologists, ethicists and social workers. Each team member should ideally be experienced in DSD and a team should have treated enough patients to ensure experience. A discrepancy is often perceived between research topics proposed by research scientists and those considered important by DSD patients [1258]. As a result of this discrepancy, collaborative networks such as the ‘dsd-LIFE’ consortium, have been established to include research scientists, health professionals, patient families, and support groups (available from: https://www.dsd-life.eu/home/index.html0. In the dsd-LIFE study, there is a focus on what patients and care-givers consider to be a priority, and research is then carried out around that issue. In addition, the newly established European Reference Network (ERN) covering rare endocrine conditions (Endo-ERN) considers patient participation in research and database management to be crucial (available from: https://endo-ern.eu/. 