7.2.3. Management of RCC with venous tumour thrombus. Tumour thrombus formation in RCC patients is a significant adverse prognostic factor. Traditionally, patients with venous tumour thrombus undergo surgery to remove the kidney and tumour thrombus. Aggressive surgical resection is widely accepted as the default management option for patients with venous tumour thrombus[440-448]. The role of neoadjuvant treatment with targeted agents has also been investigated in downstaging of tumour thrombus within the inferior vena cava (IVC) with limited and controversial results [449,450]. Further investigations are needed to better identifying which patients with RCC and tumour venous might benefit from neoadjuvant therapy (See also section 7.2.5). Several scores and tools have been proposed to estimate surgical complexity and the risk of complications, although an external validation is needed [451,452]. In two of the largest published studies a higher OS was different in patients with a level of thrombus in the renal vein and inferior caval vein and survival was also not associated with tumour size, grade, perinephric fat extension, sarcomatoid features, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group PS and regional- and distant metastases in multivariate analysis [453,454]. Therefore, all patients with non-metastatic disease and venous tumour thrombus, and an acceptable PS, should be considered for surgical intervention, irrespective of the extent of tumour thrombus at presentation. The surgical technique (open vs. laparoscopic vs. robotic) and approach for each case should be selected based on patients’ characteristics, surgeon and hospital volumes and the extent of tumour thrombus and the grade of occlusion of the IVC [449,455,456]. Minimally invasive techniques (laparoscopic and robotic) are still under investigation [457,458]. A SR and metaanalyses regarding surgical approach included 1,375 patients, out of which 329 patients were in single-arm studies and 1,046 patients were in comparative studies [459]. Of the 329 patients who underwent robotic, 14.7% were level I, 60.9% level II, 20.4% level III and 2.5% level IV thrombus. Compared with open thrombectomy, robotic approach was associated with a lower blood transfusion rate and fewer overall complications. Major complication and 30-day mortality rates were similar in both groups. In experienced hands with carefully selected patients, robotic thrombectomy can be considered; however, an emphasised selection bias limits definitive inference of these results, and optimal patient selection criteria remain to be elucidated. In case of venous thrombus, referral to a tertiary care centre is recommended to guarantee a multidisciplinary evaluation and treatment, especially in case of caval thrombus. 