8.2.3.2.3. Penile prosthesis. Penile prosthesis (PP) implantation is typically reserved for the treatment of PD in patients with concomitant ED not responding to conventional medical therapy (PDE5I or intracavernous injections of vasoactive agents) [871]. Although inflatable prostheses (IPPs) have been considered more effective in the general population with ED, some studies support the use of malleable prostheses in these patients with similar satisfaction rates [871,1095,1096]. The evidence suggests that there is no real difference between the available IPPs [1097]. Surgeons can and should advise on which type of prosthesis best suits their patients but it is the patient who should ultimately choose the prosthesis to be implanted [1098]. Most patients with mild-to-moderate curvature can expect an excellent outcome simply by cylinder insertion [1041,1099]. If the intra-operative curvature after placement of the prosthesis is < 30° no further action is indicated, since the prosthesis itself will act as an internal tissue expander to correct the curvature during the subsequent six to nine months. If, the curvature is > 30°, the first-line treatment should be modelling with the prosthesis maximally inflated (manually bent on the opposite side of the curvature for 90 seconds, often accompanied by an audible crack) [1100,1101]. If, after performing this manoeuvre, a deviation > 30° persists, subsequent steps to be considered include incision with or without collagen fleece coverage (if the defect is small, it can be left uncovered) or plaque incision and grafting are performed [1102-1107]. However, the defect may be covered if it is larger, and this can be accomplished using grafts commonly used in grafting surgery (described above) which prevent herniation and recurrent deformity and buckling due to the scarring of the defect [1108,1109]. The risk of complications (infection, malformation, etc.) is not increased compared to that in the general population. However, a small risk of urethral perforation (3%) has been reported in patients with ‘modelling’ over the inflated prosthesis [1100]. In selected cases of end-stage PD with ED and significant penile shortening, a lengthening procedure, which involves simultaneous PP implantation and penile length restoration, such as the “sliding” technique has been proposed [1110]. However, the “sliding” technique is not recommended due to reported cases of glans necrosis because of the concomitant release of the neurovascular bundle and urethra, new approaches for these patients have been recently described, such as the MoST (Modified Sliding Technique), MUST (Multiple-Slit Technique) or MIT (Multiple-Incision Technique) techniques, but these should only be used by experienced high-volume surgeons and after full patient counselling [1111-1114]. While patient satisfaction after IPP placement in the general population is high, satisfaction rates have been found to be significantly lower in those with PD. Despite this, depression rates decreased after surgery in PD patients (from 19.3%-10.9%) [1115]. The main cause of dissatisfaction after PPI in the general population is shortening; therefore, patients with PD undergoing PP surgery must be counselled that the prostheses are not designed to restore the previous penile length [1115,1116]. 