6.2.3.1.5. Combined dose-escalated radiotherapy and androgen-deprivation therapy. The combination of ADT with various forms of RT has been extensively studied, with extremely strong evidence for the use of such combined modality therapy in several settings. The MARCAP (Individual Patient Data Meta- Analysis of Randomised Trials in Cancer of the Prostate) consortium recently conducted a meta-analysis of trials using individual patient data (IPD), and a primary endpoint of MFS, a validated surrogate for OS. Trials were eligible if they studied the use or prolongation of ADT in patients receiving definitive RT, and included 12 trials with 10,853 patients. Median follow-up was over 11 years. The use of ADT was clearly associated with significant improvements in BCR, metastatic recurrence, MFS, and OS. The benefits of ADT were independent of RT dose, age, and risk groups comparing NCCN unfavourable intermediate-risk (see Sections 4.2 and 6.2.2.3), high-risk and locally-advanced disease. There were no demonstrable benefits from the extension of duration of neoadjuvant ADT [689]. Three RCTs have shown that the benefits of ADT are independent of dose escalation, and that the use of ADT would not compensate for a lower RT dose: 1.The GICOR study shows a better biochemical DFS in high-risk patients for 3D-CRT radiation dose > 72 Gy when combined with long-term ADT [690]. 2.DART01/05 GICOR shows improved OS in high-risk patients after ten years if two years of adjuvant ADT is combined with high-dose RT [691]. 3.The European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) trial 22991 shows that six months ADT improves biochemical and clinical DFS irrespective of the dose (70, 74, 78 Gy) in intermediate-risk and low-volume high-risk localised PCa patients [692]. A meta-analysis based on IPD from two RCTs (RTOG 9413 and Ottawa 0101) has compared neoadjuvant/concomitant vs. adjuvant ADT (without substratifying between favourable- and unfavourable intermediaterisk disease) in conjunction with prostate RT and reported superior PFS with adjuvant ADT, but the data heterogeneity means that this observation is hypothesis-generating only [693]. In addition, a Canadian two-arm dose-escalated (76 Gy) RCT compared neoadjuvant and concomitant with adjuvant short-term ADT in 432 patients with intermediate-risk PCa. After ten years no significant difference in OS or RT-related grade ≥ 3 GI or GU toxicity was seen [694]. Therefore both regimen in combination with dose escalation are reasonable standards. 