6.2. Prognostic markers. 6.2.1. Histopathological and clinical markers The most important histopathological prognostic variables after RC and LN dissection are tumour stage and LN status [205]. In addition, other histopathological parameters of the RC specimen have been associated with prognosis. The value of lymphovascular invasion was reported in a systematic review and meta-analysis including 78,000 patients from 65 studies treated with RC for BC [206]. Lymphovascular invasion was present in 35% of the patients and correlated with a 1.5-fold higher risk of recurrence and CSM, independent of pathological stage and peri-operative chemotherapy. This correlation was even stronger in those patients with node-negative disease [207]. In a systematic review and meta-analysis including 23 studies and over 20,000 patients, the presence of concomitant CIS in the RC specimen was associated with a higher odds ratio (OR) of ureteral involvement (pooled OR: 4.51, 2.59–7.84). Concomitant CIS was not independently associated with OS, recurrence-free survival (RFS) and DSS in all patients, but in patients with organ-confined disease concomitant CIS was associated with worse RFS (pooled HR: 1.57, 1.12–2.21) and CSM (pooled HR: 1.51, 1.001–2.280) [207]. Tumour location has been associated with prognosis. Tumours located at the bladder neck or trigone of the bladder appear to have an increased likelihood of nodal metastasis (OR: 1.83, 95% CI: 1.11–2.99) and have been associated with decreased survival [205, 208-210]. Prostatic urethral involvement at the time of RC was also found to be associated with worse survival outcomes. In a series of 995 patients, prostatic involvement was recorded in 31% of patients. The 5-year CSS in patients with CIS of the prostatic urethra was 40%, whilst the prognosis of patients with UC invading the prostatic stroma was worse with a 5-year CSS of only 12% [211]. Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) has emerged as a prognostic factor in UUT tumours [1] and other non-urological malignancies. In a pooled analysis of 21 studies analysing the prognostic role of NLR in BC, the authors correlated elevated pre-treatment NLR with OS, RFS and disease-free survival (DFS) in both localised and metastatic disease [212]. In contrast, a secondary analysis of the Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) 8710 trial, a randomised phase III trial assessing cystectomy ± NAC in patients with MIBC, suggests that NLR is neither a prognostic nor a predictive biomarker for OS in MIBC [213]. In patients with LN-positive disease, the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)-TNM staging system provides 3 subcategories. In addition, several other prognostic LN-related parameters have been reported. These include, but are not limited to, the number of positive LNs, the number of LNs removed, LN density (the ratio of positive LNs to the number of LNs removed) and extranodal extension. In a systematic review and meta-analysis, it was reported that LN density was independently associated with OS (HR: 1.45, 95%, CI: 1.11–1.90) [214]. It has been suggested that LN density outperforms the AJCC-TNM staging system for LN-positive disease in terms of prognostic value [215,216]. However, in spite of these studies supporting the use of LN density, LN density relies on the number of LNs removed which, in turn, is subject to surgical and pathological factors. This makes the concept of LN density difficult to apply uniformly [217]. Two studies investigated whether any of the reported LN-related parameters may be superior to the routinely used AJCC-TNM staging system [217,218]. Whilst the conclusion was that the AJCC-TNM staging system for LN status did not perform well, none of the other tested variables outperformed the AJCC system. 6.2.2. Molecular markers 6.2.2.1. Molecular variants based on the Cancer Genome Atlas cohort The updated Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) reported on 412 MIBCs and identified two main groups; luminal and basal-squamous - consisting of five mRNA expression-based molecular variant including luminal- papillary, luminal-infiltrated, luminal; basal-squamous; and neuronal; a variant associated with poor survival in which part of tumours do not have small cell or neuroendocrine histology. Each variant is associated with distinct mutational profiles, histopathological features and prognostic and treatment implications [219]. The basal-squamous variant is characterised by expression of basal keratin markers, immune infiltrates and is felt to be chemosensitive. The different luminal variants are characterised by fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) alterations (luminal-papillary [LumP]), epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers (luminal-infiltrated) and may be associated with chemotherapy resistance [67,68,219,220]. In 2019, a consensus on molecular variant classification was reported [221]. The authors analysed 1,750 MIBC transcriptomic profiles from 18 datasets and identified six MIBC molecular classes that reconcile all previously published classification schemes. The molecular variant classes include LumP, luminal non-specified (LumNS), luminal unstable (LumU), stroma-rich, basal/squamous (Ba/Sq), and neuroendocrine-like (NE-like). Each class has distinct differentiation patterns, oncogenic mechanisms, tumour micro-environments and histological and clinical associations. However, the authors stressed that consensus was reached for biological rather than clinical classes. Therefore, at this time, the classification should be considered as a research tool for retrospective and prospective studies until future studies establish how these molecular variants can be used best in a clinical setting. Molecular classification of MIBC is still evolving and treatment tailored to molecular variant is not a standard yet. A novel 12-gene signature derived from patients in the TCGA utilising published gene signatures has been developed and externally validated to predict OS in MIBC [222]. Interestingly, an analysis of molecular typing in MIBC demonstrated that although molecular variants reflect the heterogeneity of bladder tumours and are associated with tumour grade, clinical parameters outperformed variants for predicting outcome [223]. In the coming years, new insights into BC carcinogenesis may change our management of the disease and our ability to better predict outcomes [224]. Outside clinical trials, molecular examination, either by expression profiling or immunohistochemistry, is not yet part of routine clinical work-up awaiting more conclusive data. 