6.2.6.1. Psychological aspects and intervention. Psychosexual interventions, whether behavioural, cognitive, or focused on the couple, are aimed at teaching techniques to control/delay ejaculation, gaining confidence in sexual performance, reducing anxiety, and promoting communication and problem-solving within the couple [621]. Interventions with a focus on sexual education or acceptance may be positive as well [632]. However, psychosexual interventions alone regarding PE lack empirical support. Recent evidence suggests that start-stop exercises, combined with psycho-education and mindfulness techniques improve PE symptoms, as well as PE-associated distress, anxiety and depression [633]. The potential benefits of mindfulness have been reported [634]. Behavioural therapy may be most effective when used to ‘add value’ to medical interventions. Smartphone-delivered psychological intervention, aimed at improving behavioural skills for ejaculatory delay and sexual self-confidence, has positive effects, supporting E-health in the context of PE [635]. Figure 7: Key aspects of psychosexual evaluation 6.2.6.1.1. Summary of evidence and recommendations for the assessment and treatment (psychosexual approach) of PE Summary of evidenceLEThe incorporation of a psychosexual approach, alongside psycho-educational guidance and mindfulness techniques, ameliorates symptoms of PE and alleviate the associated distress, anxiety, and depression.2bThe combination of psychosexual approaches and pharmacological treatments yields superior outcomes compared to pharmacological interventions alone.3 Recommendations for assessmentStrength ratingAssess sexual history and psychosexual development.StrongAssess anxiety, and interpersonal anxiety; focus on control issues.StrongInclude the partner if available; check for the impact of PE on the partner.StrongRecommendations for treatment (psychosexual approach)Use behavioural, cognitive and/or couple therapy approaches in combination with pharmacotherapy. Discuss the use of mindfulness exercises.Weak 